                COMBINING GENERATIONAL AND CONSERVATIVE
           GARBAGE COLLECTION: FRAMEWORK AND IMPLEMENTATIONS
             Alan J. Demers;Mark Weiser;Barry Hayes;Hans-J.
                   Boehm;Daniel Bobrow;Scott Shenker
                             ACM, 01/01/90
              Conference Record 17th Annual ACM Symposium
on Principles of Programming Languages, January 17-19, 1990, pp. 261-269
            ftp://ftp.parc.xerox.com/pub/pcr/NewGCPopl.ps.Z

                             paper.dwhbbs90
                                 draft
                             drj 1997-01-24


ABSTRACT:

Two key ideas in garbage collection are generational collection and 
conservative pointer-finding.  Generational collection and conservative 
pointer-finding are hard to use together, because generational collection is 
usually expressed in terms of copying objects, while conservative 
pointer-finding precludes copying.  We present a new framework for defining 
garbage collectors.  When applied to generational collection, it generalizes 
the notion of younger/older to a partial order.  It can describe traditional 
generational and conservative techniques, and lends itself to combining 
different techniques in novel ways.  We study in particular two new garbage 
collectors inspired by this framework.  Both these collectors use conservative 
pointer-finding.  The first one is based on a rewrite of an existing 
trace-and-sweep collector to use one level of generation.  The second one has a 
single parameter, which controls how objects are partitioned into generations; 
the value of this parameter can be changed dynamically with no overhead.  We 
have implemented both collectors and present measurements of their performance 
in practice.

REVIEWS:

This is a deceptive paper, that promises more than it delivers.  The 
implementations presented are not derived from the (rather technical) 
framework; the embeddings that describe them in the framework are selected on 
entirely pragmatic and historical grounds, not derived from theoretical 
considerations in the framework.  It is not obvious that the framework is a 
good way of representing collectors: the sets suggested as immune and bystander 
sets are rather small and not the only possible choises, and there's no 
guidance on how to choose the embeddings.

The sticky mark bits collector is a clever trick.  Some of the other tricks are 
also good, but well-known by now.

pekka 1998-04-24

ATTACHMENT
   "NEWGC~5C.PS"

