                  TEXT DOCUMENT CHECKLIST: FORMAT ROLE
                           check.text.format
                              draft check
                           richard 1996-07-26

Scope: This checklist is to be used for checking all text documents against the 
formatting rules defined in rule.text and guide.text.

[Note: This document breaks rule.check.brief, in that it has more than 30 
questions.]


.ascii.7-bit: Does the text consist entirely of characters in the 7-bit ASCII 
set?

.ascii.mono: Is the text formatted in a monospaced font [where there is a 
choice]?

.wrap: Is the text wrapped to fit in less than 80 columns?  [This doesn't 
generally hold in Notes documents -- richard, 1996-07-26]

.para.indent: Is the first line of each paragraph not indented?

.para.blank: Is each paragraph separated by a single blank line?

.punc.space.one: Is there one space after each comma, colon, and semicolon?

.punc.space.two: Are there two spaces after each sentence end (period, query, 
pling)?

.dash.em: Are em-dashes (parenthetic dashes) represented by two hyphens?

.dash.em.space: Is there a single space before and after each em-dash?

.dash.en: Are ranges of numbers indicated by a single hyphen?

.def: Are all new terms written in double-quotes when they are introduced?

.punc.nest: Is punctuation nested properly?  (See guide.text.punc.nest.)

.emphasis: Is emphasis represented by single underscores around and between 
words?

.action: Is action or emotion indicated by asterisks around words?

.comment: Are comments in square brackets?  (See guide.text.comment.)

.plain: Would the document have the same meaning if it were reduced to plain 
text?

.head.levels: Is the level of all headings clear?  (See guide.text.levels.)

.head.doc: Is there a single document heading at the start of the document?

.head.sec.sep: Are section headings used to separate logical parts of the 
document?

.head.sec.upper: Are section headings written entirely in upper case?

.head.sec.blank: Are section headings preceded by two blank lines?

.head.subsec.sep: Are subsection headings used to separate logical parts within 
a section?

.head.subsec.cap: Are subsection headings written in proper case?  (See 
guide.text.head.subsec.)

.head.subsec.blank: Are subsection headings preceded by two blank lines?

.head.para.single: Do paragraph headings indicate the topic of a _single_ 
paragraph?

.head.para.run-in: Are paragraph headings at the start of the paragraph, 
followed by a colon?

.list.short.in-line: Are short lists written in line with the text?

.list.short.serial: Is a serial comma (or semicolon) used after the penultimate 
element of an in-line list?  (See guide.text.list.short.)

.list.space: Are list elements which are long, or span multiple lines, 
separated by a blank line?

.list.wrap: Are wrapped list elements indented so that the start of each line 
is aligned?

.list.unord: Are unordered lists indicated by bullets?

.list.ord.ind: Are ordered lists indicated by numbers on the first level, 
lower-case letters on the second level, and lower-case roman numerals on the 
third level?

.list.ord.depth: Are lists nested no more than three levels deep?

.list.def: Are definitive lists indicated by terms followed by colons?

.display.space: Is displayed text separated from the surrounding text by blank 
lines?

.display.indent: Is non-wide displayed text indented by two spaces?

.display.wide: Is wide displayed text separated from surrounding text by lines 
containing exactly three hyphens?


