                         GUIDE TO WRITING GOALS
                               guide.goal
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-03-03

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document is a guide to assist in the creation and specification of 
goals and goal documents.  It should be of help in deciding what is a goal, and 
how to phrase it.

.readership: This document is for the use of any MM developer, and anyone who 
is involved in goal specification for the MM group.

[Note: Having written this, it looks very like a rule set and a checklist 
combined in one document.  -- GavinM 1997-03-03]


DEFINITIONS

.def: A goal is a high-level, long-term aim of a project.

.specific: It should be specific enough to give a clear direction to planning, 
providing something that can be worked towards.

.measure: A goal need not be measurable; that is what requirements are for.

.sol: A goal should not be conflated with particular solutions.  If a given 
solution is the only feasible one, given the goals, then this will be 
justifiable from goals and requirements.  If a given solution is mandatory for 
other reasons, then there is a hidden goal which leads to this.

.vague: A goal may be vague (e.g. "improve", "enhance", "contribute"), but must 
still indicate a clear direction.

.version: A goal should not (usually) be specific to one product version; it is 
something that the changing requirements for different product version are all 
working towards.

[I'm not at all sure about the next two.  -- GavinM 1997-03-03]

.split: Complex goals should be split into several independent goals if they 
might have different requirements.

.join: Narrow goals should be combined into compound goals if their specificity 
risks prejudicing solution selection. [???]


TESTS

.test: If what you have is a goal, then the answer to the following questions 
will be "yes".

.test.specific: Does this give a clear direction for planning? 

.test.sol: Is attaining this specific goal the only way to satify the parties 
involved?

.test.version: Is it an enduring goal?

.element: Is the goal split into elements sufficiently finely that the impact 
of requirements on goals can be considered clearly and independently, but no 
further? [???]

