                WRITING WINDOWS VXDS AND DEVICE DRIVERS
                              Karen Hazzah
                         R&D Technical Books, 
                           ISBN:0-13-100181-7

                              book.hazzah
                               incomplete
                             drj 1995-09-06


REVIEWS:

paulb:

The book starts off by describing how to write a ring 3 driver that does
simple port and memory I/O and handles interrupts. There will be little new
here to anyone who's done DOS device driver work in the past, although it
does describe a couple of "gotchas" that afflict this sort of driver.

The next section goes on to describe VxDs (ring 0 drivers). There's a
reasonable description of the architecture of Windows and how it affects
VxDs, the structure of a simple VxD, trapping port and memory accesses and
handling interrupts.

The final section covers a miscellany of topics not covered earlier: how to
handle interrupts in ring 0 without a VxD, bimodal interrupt handlers, DMA,
using real mode services from a VxD, writing for standard mode, timers and
software interrupts.

The book doesn't contain any Windows 95 details, although most of what it
does contain is still relevant to Windows 95. All the example code is in
assembly. There's no coverage of MCA, EISA or PCI - the section on DMA in
particular is only really relevant to ISA.

I wish this book was available when I started writing Windows VxDs! It's
much better than its competition - "Writing Windows Device Drivers" by
Norton and "Writing Windows Virtual Device Drivers" by Thielen and Woodruff
- both of which are little more than reprints of the Microsoft
documentation. What this book gives you, which neither of the other two do,
is the "big picture".

It won't have much to tell someone who has already worked all this out the
hard way, but if you haven't written a VxD before I would suggest that this
book is a "must have". Even if you have written a VxD before and have a
reasonable understanding of Windows' architecture, you will probably find
something useful here (although you'll find yourself skipping over much of
the book).

Please ask me if you want to borrow my copy.

PaulB->msgCount++





