                      L3: INTERGROUP COORDINATION
                                 kpa.ic
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Intergroup 
Coordination, a key area of Level 3 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Intergroup Coordination is to establish a means for 
the software engineering group to participate actively with the other 
engineering groups so the project is better able to satisfy the customer's 
needs effectively and efficiently.

Intergroup Coordination involves the software engineering group's participation 
with other project engineering groups to address system-level requirements, 
objectives, and issues. Representatives of the project's engineering groups 
participate in establishing the system-level requirements, objectives, and 
plans by working with the customer and end users, as appropriate. These 
requirements, objectives, and plans become the basis for all engineering 
activities.

The technical working interfaces and interactions between groups are planned 
and managed to ensure the quality and integrity of the entire system. Technical 
reviews and interchanges are regularly conducted with representatives of the 
project's engineering groups to ensure that all engineering groups are aware of 
the status and plans of all the groups, and that system and intergroup issues 
receive appropriate attention.

The software-specific practices related to these engineering tasks are 
described in the Requirements Management and Software Product Engineering key 
process areas.


GOALS

.goal.req: The customer's requirements are agreed to by all affected groups.

.goal.commit: The commitments between the engineering groups are agreed to by 
the affected groups.

.goal.track: The engineering groups identify, track, and resolve intergroup 
issues.

