       LIST OF INTERNAL RESOURCES SUITABLE FOR EXTERNAL WEB PAGES
                          report.web-resources
                             temporary doc
                           gavinm 1996-07-05

INTRODUCTION

.intro: As decided in meeting.web.1996-06-21.schedule, I will be producing some 
initial pages for internal review by mid-July.  The purpose of this document is 
to document the existing resources I will be drawing on for these pages, and 
outline where else I plan to look.


BOOKS

.book.infosys: Our collection of book.* bibliography entries is quite short of 
texts on memory management techniques.  It does, however, have some 
architecture-specific books which would be worth providing reviews for.  These 
include: book.dec92, book.hazzah,  book.kane92, and book.sparc92.  

.book.other: Other books I found lying around include (with suggested bib 
references):
    - [IWMM95] Memory Management: International Workshop; proceedings
    - [Brey94] The Intel Microprocessors
    - [DN94] C++ Memory Management, Dorfman & Neuberger
    - [Hogan91] The Programmer's PC Sourcebook

.book.alg: Various algorithm books make passing reference to memory management 
techniques.  These include:
    - Knuth's Art of Computer Programming, Volume 1

.book.religion: We could throw in reviews of Tom Gilb's books for no readily 
apparent reason.


PAPERS

.paper.infosys: The information system has 42 paper.* entries, about 34 of 
which are related to memory management.  Whilst the reviews are useful in 
themselves, we need to determine which are available on the Web (and can hence 
be linked) and whether we ought to offer to put the others up.  Note that 
Richard is working on getting permission to put up Paul Wilson's papers (see 
meeting.web.1996-02-21.content.papers).

.paper.to-read: I found a file of papers to be read, of which about 10 were 
related to memory management.  There may be some intersection with 
.paper.infosys.

.paper.own: In meeting.web.1996-06-21.content.own-publications we decided to 
provide online copies of our own publications.  [What are these?]  E.g. 
ftp://reports.adm.cs.cmu.edu/usr0/anon/1993/CMU-CS-93-135.ps.


OTHER

.glossary: The current glossary (glossary) is poor, but we already propose to 
improve it.  We could provide a version of this, but we need to be particularly 
careful about trade secrets.

.faq: There isn't an FAQ for memory management in general, but there are 
various documents on specific areas.  Preparing this would be tricky.  Perhaps 
I should start by monitoring the relevant Usenet groups (comp.lang.*, 
comp.compilers, etc.) and mailing lists (gc-list).  I could actually make a 
public offer to gather an MM FAQ.

.rival: Although we have decided (meeting.web.1996-06-21.content.products) not 
to provide information on competitors, there are non-commercial "rivals" we 
might consider covering.

.os: We have gathered lots of snippets about various OS's and architectures, 
but I don't think this is suitable for export without substantial extra work.  
An excpetion might be summary.bird95.

