                        EDIT SESSION 1997-03-19
                            edit.1997-03-19
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-03-19

KICKOFF

.ko.plan: 1997-03-19 11:00 UTC

.ko.actual: 11:11

.attendees: DRJ, Richard, NickB, GavinM

.plan.drj: protan 18 - finish, protsu 50 - halfway

.plan.richard: impl.h.mps do 20 out of 40

.plan.nickb: poolepdl c, h, mpm - 30-40 defects out of 110

.plan.gavinm: web 103 of 103 - exit

.ko.end: 11:14


REPORT

.report.plan: 16:00

.report.actual: 16:00

.report.drj: Finished protan, 2 edits to protsu

.report.richard: finished 58 issues, ready for exit

.report.nickb: done 7 issues

.report.gavinm: done 20


BRAINSTORM

GavinM: Overestimated, because many should have been done.  Next estimate 
should be correct.

NickB: What order do people do issues in?

Richard: Linear, but majors first.

GavinM: Gilb logs by sections

Richard: Might be useful, and might help with people falling asleep.  

GavinM: Especially for certain issue types.

Richard: More like walk-through.  Feels better.

NickB: Still majors first?

GavinM: Not clear.  I'll think about it.


GavinM: We're doing edits far slower than reviews.

Richard: Everyone's doing customer-related tasks which seem more important.

GavinM: What about pushing for resolution of major issues?

Richard: Should push harder for people to do edits with major edits in.

GavinM: How do I push people?

Richard: Go and nag them.

GavinM: I don't feel that this is either effective or personally rewarding.

Richard: It's about time-planning.  That's what the edit session is for.

NickB: Is there sufficient time?

GavinM: I find myself working on once I'm re-contextualized.

NickB: That's true.  

Richard: Why isn't Tucker here.

GavinM: I discussed this with him.  He has a book outline to complete for 
Thursday and I accepted this easily because it made it easier to have an 11 am 
start.  It's difficult to have an inter-continental edit session.

Richard: People should set aside Wed pm in their plan for general quality 
improvements.  We shouldn't give this time up easily.  The importance of edits 
is higher than we give it.

There are too many defects.  Why are we not succeeding in not having defects in 
review.

GavinM: Where do edits fit into Darwin?  We could set quality targets for 
releases.

Richard: Or we could rebind approval or QA.

NickB: Edits are Changes.

Richard: No.  Edits are part of completing a change.

NickB: In a lot of cases, you could consider all the changes to meet a request 
to be reviewed together.

Richard: Darwin isn't task tracking.  A Change indicates a change to the 
configuration of the product.  Each change should be a single thing to meet a 
request.

NickB: If Darwin shows the work to be done, it should show reviews and edits.

Richard: They should show up in our process, but I don't think a Change should 
represent that sort of thing.

GavinM: We do have approval, but that is assignment-based.

DRJ: At the moment we review documents, not changes.

GavinM: Remember we can keep up with changes in context at one review per 
fortnight.

Richard: In PSP we would do a whole lot of things in the course of a change.  
The review would have plan, outline design, design, implementation.  This could 
be simple for small changes, but we could have all this stuff.  Doing a design 
isn't a change.  A request isn't a task either.

Number of defects.  People are expecting to find a certain number of things.  
People find defects at a constant rate (Gilb).  People find things which aren't 
important.  

GavinM: So how can you have review not finding defects?  If we can stop finding 
major defects, we can move towards sampling.

Richard: I don't think that's a solution.  

DRJ: The problem is insufficient quality.

Richard: What's the benefit of raising these rules.  We're not actually 
following a process.  We're not calling our rules.  We're not using checklists.

NickB: I don't feel that calling out rules is a benefit.

Richard: It might not be for your benefit.  

NickB: Most minor defects are either genuine minor problems, or problems of 
comprehension that are clarity issues.

GavinM: If we crack design, we'll see major defects go down.

NickB: And minors.

Richard: Also, too many bits of paper.  

GavinM: Backlog of process improvements, and half of improvements add to paper.

Richard: Want one sheet to work from.  Need to prioritize ...

[Bus]

.report.close: 16:31

