                     LIMITED VERSION OF WEB PRODUCT
                          version.web.limited
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1996-11-19

INTRODUCTION

.purpose: The purpose of the limited release is to a select group within 
Harlequin to review the pages and give some feedback before 
version.web.internal.

.req: The requirememts for the limited release are unspecified.

.contact: The people concerned are as follows:
  Clive Harris <cliveh>         MM product marketing
  Glenn Bach <glennb>           head of Communications
  Andi Hindle <andih>           web in Communications
  Kent Pitman <kmp>             lots of technical knowledge and web opinions
  Jon L White <jonl>            senior Lucid technical person with GC
  Bob Matthews <rom>            documentation and technical knowledge
  Keith Corbett <kmc>           web expert
  mathew <meta>                 web opinions, and C/C++ perspective
  Hugo Tyson <hugo>             expert C perspective
  Mark Tillotson <markt>        GC expert
  Martin Simmons <martin>       GC expert

.plan: The limited release occurred on 1996-09-30.


RELEASE NOTES

.notes: From mail.richard.1996-09-30.17-41:

The MM Group is about to put up a set of web pages on the Harlequin site.
We'd like to put the pages through an internal review before making them
public.  They are essentially draft at the moment, and we're sure that
there are improvements to be made.  I'd like to invite you to help us.

Please do not worry too much about the appearance of the pages.  We are
mostly concerned with content and structure.  The purpose of your review
should be to assess whether the pages achieve their goal, as stated below.

After consultation with you we will open the pages for comment to all the
staff, before making them publically available.

You will find the pages at <URL:http://webhost.long.harlequin.co.uk/~mm/>.

Please send comments to mm-web, which you can read as a local newsgroup,
harlqn.memory-management.web.

---

BACKGROUND

We decided to set up Memory Management web pages to promote Harlequin as an
authority in the run up to memory management product release next year.

Notes from previous meetings concerning the web pages are available in the
Memory Management Information database (PROJECTS/MEMMAN/MMINFO2.NSF on a
server near you) under meeting.web.*.


GOALS

The purpose of the MM web pages is to promote the image of Harlequin as an
authority on memory management.  The pages will be in _indirect_ promotion
of any memory management product we might release, and also promote
products in which we have GC, such as LISP, Dylan, Watson, and ScriptWorks.
The web pages should encourage contacts requesting information about our
products, but also about consultancy.


DESIGN

The pages will be distinct from Harlequin's main corporate pages, and will
not share the same corporate style.  The idea is to promote the pages as
_the_ repository for memory management related information on the Internet.
To that end, the pages must appear neutral and independent.  Harlequin are
providing them as a service, in return for good will.  The pages will link
to Harlequin's main page on that basis.  The web pages will avoid direct
promotion of Harlequin products.

The pages are a fairly straightforward set of resources, containing a
bibliography, glossary, and FAQs.  There is a "what's new" section to
encourage repeat visits.  No proprietry information will be provided.  The
pages are merely a concentration of publically available information.


STATUS AND PLANS

The pages are complete (that is, "complete" as far as we want to take them
initially).

We will take them through internal review.  Intially we will perform a
review within the MM Group, and bring in a few selected technical and
non-technical people.  I would then like to have open internal review with
comments invited from all Harlequin staff.  This is likely to shake out
many more details.  I feel it is also important to consult everyone.  This
consultation could last one week.

During this week we should prepare everything for the pages to go up, so
that we are ready to go.  At the end of the week we would put the pages up
and announce them in the appropriate newsgroups and mailing lists.

