            NOTES ON DYLAN REQUIREMENTS MEETING, 1995-08-24
                        meeting.dylan.1995-08-24
                               draft doc
                           richard 1995-08-24

INTRODUCTION

This meeting was called by Jonathan Bachrach on 1995-08-23:

> From: Jonathan Bachrach <jonathan>
> Date: Wed, 23 Aug 1995 14:58:24 -0400
> To: tony, richard, ptw, swm, jonathan
> Subject: meeting tomorrow
>
> i would like to have a meeting tomorrow at 11am to discuss the MM
> needs/priorities of the Dylan group.  Is this time ok for everybody?
>
> jonathan


NOTES

Need
  - thread
  - finalization
  - weakness
  - persistence

We should figure out the ordering on those requirements, and any other 
qualities which it's sensible to state.

Integration with Dylan environment required.
Reference platform.
andys: talk in terms of ratio between GC and mutator activity.
tony: also in terms of interactive performance
tony: we do want psychologically acceptable pause times
andys: We can go back to PARC papers to talk about latency and original.
       Never get a pause time in excess of 10ms.  Productivity in terms
       of work unit.  That is not in terms of psychology.
swm: LispWorks exceeds the worst acceptable case.  At most a couple of seconds.
     Normal distribution, where main part fall in to where we want.
andys: Can we ask for thread safety within a couple of weeks.
richard: Can come up with better estimate by the end of next week.

jonathan: We do need persistence.  We need information from you.
swm: We could have a persistence requirements meeting.  Jonathan and Tucker 
could figure out the outline.  Jonathan has an architecture, and Tucker knows 
how it might fit in with MM, so we should be trying to nail that down.
We should order stuff.  One thing that Jonathan has is that it should be 
transparent.  How much money can we spend on this?

Commitment to maintain req.dylan.

ACTIONS
- thread estimation by the end of next week
- papers on psychology
- negotiate requirements
- finalization real requirements
- make questions for requirements
- weak/final: thread stuff, end-programmers, database people need weak tables
- Tucker producing information for decision making
  - Jonathan and tucker on design
  - andy and richard functional requirements


