                  TRANSCRIPT OF #MM-EDIT ON 1997-05-21
                         irc.mm-edit.1997-05-21
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-05-22

#mm-edit: @GavinM 
*** #mm-edit :End of /NAMES list.
*** Mode is + 
    GavinM: Test.
    GavinM: Hello world.
    GavinM: Hello hello.
*** GavinM2 (~gavinm@terpsichore.long.harlequin.co.uk) has joined channel 
#mm-edit
*** GavinM2 has set the topic on channel #mm-edit to Edit session
*** ptw-ircle (~ptw@myteline.harlequin.com) has joined channel #mm-edit
   GavinM2: Hello.
 ptw-ircle: "
   GavinM2: 16:05
   GavinM2: How did your edits go?
 ptw-ircle: None accomplished.  Notes difficulty yesterday, distraction by 
IRCLE today.
   GavinM2: Is having IRC running too much of a distraction?
*** drj (~drj@deja-vu.long.harlequin.co.uk) has joined channel #mm-edit
 ptw-ircle: I spent about 45 minutes trying to figure out why I couldn't print 
from Notes.
*** Richard (richard@dynamic-house3.long.harlequin.co.uk) has joined channel 
#mm-edit
 ptw-ircle: It was due to Desktop Printer
   GavinM2: I've spent most of the last three days printing from Notes.  It 
hasn't been a rewarding experience.
*** drj has left channel drj
 ptw-ircle: This am I printed and got started for about 30 minutes, edited 
nothing tho, just chose points to address.
   GavinM2: Let's have a round of reports, then we'll move to discussion.
   Richard: I've reorganized the tracer to pool protocol and improved the 
collection benefit calculation, myself.
            Richard shuts up -- no edits
   GavinM2: I planned to close 20 issues and I actually closed 20.
   GavinM2: I spent about 2-3 hours on it.
   GavinM2: I found IRC distracting as well.
   GavinM2: David?
       drj: I spent about 45 minutes on edits
   GavinM2: Good.  Discussion.
       drj: I created analysis.mps.bt
       drj: and slightly edited design.mps.bt
       drj: I resolved 0 defects
   GavinM2: We'll conclude later whether IRC is worthwhile for discussion in a 
meeting, 
   GavinM2: Is it a productivity loss to have it on all the time?
   GavinM2: Will the novelty wear off?
            Richard is showing Kier our virtual meeting
   GavinM2: Already I detect one problem with an IRC mediated meeting ... 
people don't pay attention.
    GavinM: ^G
       drj: I'm more likely to drift off if nothing happens in the meeting gavin
   GavinM2: More likely with IRC?
   Richard: I think it's because we have visitors.
       drj: in general.  nothing is happening with the meeting.  CAN WE GET ON?
   Richard: this isn't richard, this is keir, taking over 
body-snatcher-style... hehehe
   GavinM2: Get on with what?  I have two discussion questions on the table and 
no responses.
       drj: Oh I see.  I wondered what the questions were about.  I thought we 
were going to do that later.  perhaps I was mislead the previous sentence.
       drj: I think at the moment it is a productivity loss, I think this 
perception will wear off.  quite possibly so will the productivity loss
   GavinM2: Ok.  I'll do the usual intro.  What problems did people encounter 
that hindered bring documents to exit either today or in general?
       drj: the novelty may well wear off
 ptw-ircle: It diverts my productivity
       drj: confused.
       drj: what part of what meeting are we in now
       drj: ?
   GavinM2: Process brainstrom.
 ptw-ircle: I had problems with Notes, was distracted by IRC conversation on 
statistics
   Richard: GavinM2: I suggest creative use of the topic line.
*** Richard has set the topic on channel #mm-edit to Process Brainstorm
   GavinM2: Hmm.
   Richard: That was my process improvement suggestion.
   Richard: I also suggest that we close the door next time.
   Richard: Just like we would for a real meeting.
   GavinM2: I think the main distraction today has been IRC.
       drj: I was distracted by IRC
   Richard: Not for me.  I've had a useful discussion.
       drj: and now by tamagotchi
 ptw-ircle: Being a novice IRC user, I am distracted by trying to figure it out
   GavinM2: I've done it now, but it's a bit like shutting the door after the 
browsers have entered.
   Richard: All you need to know are /join, /quit, and /me.
   GavinM2: There are two IRC questions:
   GavinM2: 1. Is it useful for meetings like this?
   GavinM2: 2. Is it useful as a "virtual office"?
   GavinM2: Discuss.
   GavinM2: Expand, contract, and explode.
 ptw-ircle: Cool, /join with no argument joins a channel I cannot leave because 
it does not exits
   Richard: If we all pay attention it's useful for meetings.  We could try it.
   Richard: ptw: I didn't say it was good.
       drj: Er.  Why are we brainstorming IRC and not the edit session?  When 
we have phone meetings we don't discuss how the phones affect our meetings.
   GavinM2: Try what?  Paying attention?
 ptw-ircle: 1. It is too early to tell
 ptw-ircle: 2. It is too early to tell
   Richard: As a virtual office it might work well if we all turn up.  Today 
I've consulted Tucker about something I might not otherwise've done.
   GavinM2: DRJ, because it has been reported as the main diversion from edit 
progress today.
   Richard: I'm not sure that's IRC.  I think that was me asking him about 
prediction functions.  We just used IRC.
 ptw-ircle: consulted Tucker:  benefit
       drj: this client is signifcantly hampering me, too much clutter, I can't 
easilty find the end of the thread because of wrap-around behaviour.
   GavinM2: As we continue to be split between three sites, I think it's 
important we consult the whole group about things.
   Richard: drj: We should get ircII or you could use your PC.
   GavinM2: Brainstorms often exclude people not in the Pool Hall.
   Richard: Right.  I think sheep liked it.
       drj: yeah, I like the virtual office.  I often feel that sheep and ptw 
are detached, and this has helped
       drj: yes, either of those would be fine.
            Richard invites sheep
 ptw-ircle: Richard:  why/how did IRC cause you to consult me, vs. email?
       drj: the stats thing today was a bit confrontational, that was because 
we had the usual problem of longstanton working out their position in secret 
and then presenting it to ptw
   GavinM2: I knew we should have stuck to one channel.
   Richard: Hmm.  Because it's immediate and I am developing a loathing of 
e-mail because I have so much of it.
   Richard: It's not healthy, I know.
       drj: I think if it had started here it would've been fine.
   GavinM2: IRC is weak for mathematics and diagrams.
   Richard: I used to be really good at mail.  I think it's a sign of stress 
that I'm not able to concentrate for long periods.
 ptw-ircle: confrontational:  An email summarizing your position and an invite 
to IRC might've been better?
   Richard: The thing with a conversation is that you can react to the other 
person and so home in on what needs to be communicated faster.
       drj: yea, that too would've helped.  we spent a load of time just 
working out what each other's defns were, but then that happens a lot anyway.
   GavinM2: Aside: I feel far less in control of this meeting.  8-)
   Richard: With e-mail the turnround time is longer so it isn't as focussed.
   Richard: Ha ha!  You can't interrupt me now.
 ptw-ircle: But positions are more well thought out.  But misinterpretations 
abound
   GavinM2: I think we should try using IRC for a meeting again.
*** sheep (sheep@zaarin.cam.harlequin.co.uk) has joined channel #mm-edit
   GavinM2: I can't interrupt, but it doesn't  matter (as such) if we talk over 
eahc other.
   Richard: Sheep, we're discussing the merits of IRC for meetings.
 ptw-ircle: Email to initiate, IRC to focus?
     sheep: Thanks Richard for updateing me. 
   Richard: Or maybe both ways.  IRC to brainstorm and get somewhere, e-mail to 
consolidate, further discussion, etc.  Just like in the office.
 ptw-ircle: Is IRC more of a distraction than office mates?
       drj: probably not
   Richard: I can ignore it more easily.
   GavinM2: Once I get a logbot set up, this will be part of the InfoSys and as 
findable, searchable, and referrable as e-mail.
   Richard: I have to really try hard to ignore conversations in the room.
     sheep: I agree it fits in well with me working
 ptw-ircle: Perhaps my productivity is enhanced by IRC because I am less likely 
to doze off
   GavinM2: S'true.
       drj: er... I'm surprised you think that richard.  you seem to ignore 
most of what goes on in the office and have ignored little of what went on in 
IRC
   Richard: ptw: You should sit on a stool, then ifyou doze off you'll hit the 
floor.
   GavinM2: I used to use earplugs at Shape.
   GavinM2: Ok ...
       drj: did you ever get ear infections?
   GavinM2: What process improvements have we come up with?
       drj: better client for drj
   Richard: I was directly invovled in what went on in IRC today.
 ptw-ircle: What I meant was IRC was a useful distraction, vs. 24-bit color 
nude .gif's that take too long to download anyways ;-)
   GavinM2: (DRJ, No.)
   GavinM2: Use NT.
 ptw-ircle: NT, for ear infections?
   Richard: No, for nude gifs.
       drj: discussions should probably have a introductory document (eg, email 
messages)
   Richard: Gavin: I think it's too early to say much.  Let's try it for a week 
or more.
 ptw-ircle: Oh, they come on the NT install CD?
   Richard: As long as we all agree to turn up we'll have some more valid 
opinions.
 ptw-ircle: #t
   Richard: No, you just get obscene stuff on M$ install CDs.
   GavinM2: Sheep and I are using an NT IRC client; I suggest DRJ tries it.
   GavinM2: I never got an ear infection from using ear plugs at Shape, or at 
any time for any reason.
     sheep: Yep I'm reading you in groovey comic sans
 ptw-ircle: So, sheep and Gavin have nude gifs?
            Richard laughs
       drj: I want the flexibility of being able to use either NT or UNIX, will 
hunt down ircII
     sheep: it;s very nice on the eyes
       drj: comic is horrible.
   GavinM2: I have made no comment on nude GIFs.  Oops!
   Richard: I hate comic.
       drj: uhuh, fount wars.
   Richard: In fact, I think all the M$ web fonts are very poor.  Or perhaps 
they're just very poor on the Mac.  Wouldn't be the first time.
 ptw-ircle: ProFont
     sheep: I find I have eye pains when using an NT screen.
   Richard: ProFont is great, but nothing beats Gill Sans on paper.  New York 
for web browsers.
      *drj* er, thankyou
   Richard: sheep: That is serious.  Consult Miranda.
     sheep: yep Gill Sans
 ptw-ircle: New Century Schoolbook?
       drj: Hmm.  Gill Sans is fine for display work, but I wouldn't want to 
read a book in it
   Richard: Shlbk's OK, I suppose.  I don't have any passion for it.
     sheep: I've asked for the large fonts to be installed (this comic is 
restful)
   GavinM2: Can we action someone to sort out Sheep's fonts/display?
       drj: I like Schoolbook for books, funnily enough.
   Richard: Gavin, you do it.
     sheep: It's all ready being worked on. 
 ptw-ircle: I seem not to have Gill Sans, tho it's here somewhere...
   GavinM2: I hate it when he does that.
   Richard: I have a pile of action items here, if anyone's not busy...
   Richard: Does anyone want to take a couple of hundred "important" mail 
messages off my hands?
            ptw-ircle takes one step backward
            GavinM2 pushes DRJ one step forwards.
   Richard: The XPQ urgently needs de-flooming.
            ptw-ircle retreats rapidly
   GavinM2: DRJ's going to have to go soon.  Have we any major process 
improvements to come out of this?
       drj: I am getting the CMT express service
   GavinM2: Did you know that 80% of microfleems are sub-radiante?
   Richard: I see cmt arriving out of the window.
   GavinM2: That's a funny place to arrive.
   Richard: IRC encourages frivolity.
 ptw-ircle: Interesting how perception of time is warped...
 ptw-ircle: I think 5pm encourages frivolity
     sheep: I would like to experiment with a code review session. see if it 
takes less time 
       drj: I think it's too early to make informed improvements.
   GavinM2: I definitely have less control over this type of meeting.
   Richard: OK, so we agree to turn up on IRC during the next week and try it 
out.  Other than that, we need a better client for drj (who should also try the 
NT one).  gavin could think about conventions for meetings.  OTher than that, 
there's nothing.
 ptw-ircle: Have the ircle users paid their s/w fees?
     sheep: than it did last time (which is why we did in the first place)
            GavinM2 laughs.
            sheep smiles
       drj: There used to be a set of coventions for BBS discussions.  single 
character interrupts and prompts IIRC
   Richard: I will authorize shareware fees if we decide it's useful past the 
end of next week.
            ptw-ircle nods
       drj: things like ? for I have a question and * for over
   GavinM2: DRJ, can you give me a reference for that?
       drj: and >drj for floor granted to drj
       drj: etc
       drj: not yet. gavinm
    GavinM: who me?
       drj: I meant, "GavinM, not yet".
   Richard: Gavin, are you goign to close this meeting?
 ptw-ircle: Anyone using color?
 ptw-ircle: Faces worth anything?
       drj: er, I'm displaying in IndianRed which is pretty unusual for me.
   GavinM2: Has anyone anything else to say on the edit process topic?
       drj: y
   GavinM2: Do faces animate?
       drj: the structure of the meeting was completely unclear.
   GavinM2: This is the first IRC meeting I've chaired.
     sheep: nothing new there
   GavinM2: Hmph.
       drj: at one point we were going round doing reports, and then we were 
discussing problems, it all segued together in a big heap
   Richard: drj and I did a MkLinux port in about 20 mins the other evening, 
btw.
       drj: is the linear order of utterances the same for everyone?
 ptw-ircle: You can have several faces I believe and set which will display
   Richard: No
   Richard: No, the order is not preserved, except it probably is because we're 
all using the same server.
   GavinM2: Ok.  I thought the structure of the meeting was clear at that 
point.  I'll go back over the log and consider why you found it confusing.
   Richard: Out in the real IRC networks it's total chaos.
   Richard: OK.  I'm off.
       drj: I think I was missing a lot of sub-vocal prompts that I can pick up 
in a phone-meeting
   GavinM2: PTW, are you getting any lag from using a Longstanton server?
*** Richard has left channel Richard
 ptw-ircle: And would be if I talked to a 1cc server?  Or (perish) a spoon-hill 
server?
       drj: er, me too, then.  apparently
 ptw-ircle: How would I know if I were getting a lag?
   GavinM2: Good question.
 ptw-ircle: Here
   GavinM2: People would reply to remarks before you saw them.
 ptw-ircle: I am timestamping my messages
 ptw-ircle: Oh, that kind of lag.  No.
   GavinM2: Your remarks would appear lower in the log than you'd expect.
 ptw-ircle: Timestamping won't tell me anything, it seems to only have minute 
grain
*** Signoff: Richard (Going home)
 ptw-ircle: Hard to say if "lower" is happening.  I may just type slow
   GavinM2: Ok.  I think I'll close this meeting.  Any objections?
   GavinM2: 5
   GavinM2: 4
            ptw-ircle declines to object
   GavinM2: 3
   GavinM2: 2
   GavinM2: 1
*** Signoff: ptw-ircle (Ircle was here!)
     sheep: Gavin, I'm worried as one of the main benificaries of IRC that ...
   GavinM2: Yes?
       drj: shall we go to #mm?
   GavinM2: I'm still on #mm.
     sheep: Gavin I'll be back next monday don't drop the system/experiment 
before next week!
     sheep: I'm off back to MM
*** sheep has left channel sheep
*** GavinM2 has left channel GavinM2
*** PART: Not enough parameters
*** #: No such channel
*** Bye: No such channel

