                 PROCEDURE FOR CONSULTING ON A REQUEST
                          proc.request.consult
                            incomplete proc
                           gavinm 1998-09-14


.intro: See proc.darwin for scope, readership, update procedure, and additional 
procedural notes.  See also guide.request.

.purpose: Sometimes a request owner needs to consult someone else about a 
request before proceeding, but it is not appropriate to pass ownership of the 
request because it should revert to the current owner and status after 
consultation.  If the other person is a user of MM Evolution, then this 
procedure is appropriate.

.purpose.approval: A common type of consultation is a "definition approval", 
where someone is given the chance to disagree with a request definition before 
work is scheduled on the basis of it.


REQUESTING CONSULTATION

.request.check: Check that you are the owner of this document.

.request.open: Open the request and enter edit mode.

.request.request: Add a request for feedback to the request description.  E.g.:
  DEFINITION APPROVAL

  .approval.request: Sidney, please approve this definition.  I'm concerned 
that we might not need .sol.foo if we're also doing .sol.bar.  SPQR 1998-01-01

.request.feedback: Set the "Awaiting feedback from" field to the username of 
the consulted party.

.request.other: Leave the owner field to yourself, and the status as it should 
be after consultation.

.request.close: Save and close the request document.  Give a change comment 
such as "Passed to Sidney for definition approval".


CONSULTING

.consult.check: Check that you are named in the "Awaiting feedback from" field 
of this document.

.consult.open: Open the request and enter edit mode.

.consult.consult: Add your feedback to the appropriate section of the request 
description.  E.g.:
  .approval.approved: SPQR, I still think you're right that we should do both.  
Approved.  Sidney 1998-01-02
or:
  .approval.rejected: SPQR, We must not do both as they clash horribly.  
Rejected.  Sidney 1998-01-02

.consult.feedback: Set the "Awaiting feedback from" field to be blank.

.consult.other: Leave the owner and status fields alone.

.consult.close: Save and close the request document.  Give a change comment 
such as "Approved definition" or "Rejected definition".


