                  L2: SOFTWARE SUBCONTRACT MANAGEMENT
                                kpa.ssm
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Software Subcontract 
Management, a key area of Level 2 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Software Subcontract Management is to select qualified 
software subcontractors and manage them effectively.

Software Subcontract Management involves selecting a software subcontractor, 
establishing commitments with the subcontractor, and tracking and reviewing the 
subcontractor's performance and results.  These practices cover the management 
of a software (only) subcontract, as well as the management of the software 
component of a subcontract that includes software, hardware, and possibly other 
system components.

The subcontractor is selected based on its ability to perform the work.  Many 
factors contribute to the decision to subcontract a portion of the prime 
contractor's work. Subcontractors may be selected based on strategic business 
alliances, as well as technical considerations. The practices of this key 
process area address the traditional acquisition process associated with 
subcontracting a defined portion of the work to another organization.

When subcontracting, a documented agreement covering the technical and 
nontechnical (e.g., delivery dates) requirements is established and is used as 
the basis for managing the subcontract. The work to be done by the 
subcontractor and the plans for the work are documented. The standards that are 
to be followed by the subcontractor are compatible with the prime contractor's 
standards.

The software planning, tracking, and oversight activities for the subcontracted 
work are performed by the subcontractor. The prime contractor ensures that 
these planning, tracking, and oversight activities are performed appropriately 
and that the software products delivered by the subcontractor satisfy their 
acceptance criteria. The prime contractor works with the subcontractor to 
manage their product and process interfaces.


GOALS

.goal.select: The prime contractor selects qualified software subcontractors.

.goal.agree: The prime contractor and the software subcontractor agree to their 
commitments to each other.

.goal.comm: The prime contractor and the software subcontractor maintain 
ongoing communications.
.
.goal.track: The prime contractor tracks the software subcontractor's actual 
results and performance against its commitments.

