                     A ONE-PAGE INSPECTION HANDBOOK
                          book.gilb93.handbook
                              draft quote
                          Tom Gilb 1995-01-01

This Handbook shall never be printed on more than a page after updates.  This 
note will always be included.

1. The Inspection process is always managed by a trained and certified 
Inspection leader.

2. The leader is responsible for managing the process in all respects for 
productive results.

3. The first objective of the Inspection is to identify and correct major 
defects.

4. The second, but most important objective of Inspection is to identify and 
remove the source of defects.

5. The fundamental measure of Inspection success is the quality-to-cost ratio 
of the total development and service life-cycle.

6. Short-term measures include major issues found per work-hour used 
(efficiency), and the percentage of defects identified and treated compared to 
the total defects (effectiveness).

7. The productivity measure of Inspection is the net hours saved, estimated 
statistically, due to defects found and removed earlier than they otherwise 
would be.

8. Entry: The rest of the Inspection process is only entered when a specified 
set of entry criteria have been met.

9. Planning: The leader selects a set of source documentation, candidate 
documentation, checklists, rule sets, checking rates, people, roles, and 
logging meeting rates to ensure maximum productivity.

10. Kickoff: The leader can elect to run a "kickoff" meeting prior to the 
checking.  Team improvement goals and corresponding strategies are adopted.  
Any necessary instructions will be given.

11. Checking: The checking phase has a recommended time or rate, but checkers 
have instructions to deviate from that whenever individual availability, role, 
or situation dictates, in order to increase productivity.

12. The objective of individual checking is to identify a maximum of unique 
major issues which no other checker will bring to the logging meeting.  To do 
this each checker should have at least one special "role".

13. Logging meeting: The team concentrates on logging items at a rate of at 
least one per minute.  Items logged include potential defects (issues), 
improvement suggestions, and questions of intent to the author.  The leader 
permits little other verbal meeting activity.  Meetings last as maximum of two 
hours at the known optimum rate.  If necessary, work must be chunked to avoid 
tiredness.  Optimum checking rate for the meeting is determined by the 
percentage of new issues identified in the logging meeting as well as the 
quantity of the documents.

14. Edit: Issue analysis and correction action is undertaken by an editor.  
Some written action must be taken on all logged issues -- if necessary by 
sending change requests to other authors.  The editor makes the final 
classification of issues into defects, and reports final defect metrics to the 
leader.  Edit also deals with improvements and can deal with "questions to the 
author".

15. Follow-up: The leader shall determine that some appropriate written action 
has been taken on all logged issues.  The leader is not responsible for the 
correctness (the editor is).

16. Exit: The leader determines whether the formal exit criteria have been met 
before signing off completion of the Inspection.  These include follow-up 
completed, metrics delivered, planned rates kept to, and level of remaining 
defects within acceptable bounds.

17. Process brainstorming: Immediately after each logging meeting time is used 
to brainstorm the process causes of major defects, and to brainstorm 
improvements to remove these causes.  The meeting shall last no more than half 
an hour.  The objective is to maximize production of useful ideas and personal 
commitment to change within that time.

