                     CUMULATIVE INFORMATION BY TIME
                     design.product.tool.cumltvtime
                           incomplete design
                            sheep 1997-06-11


INTRODUCTION:

This document is intended as a way of thinking about possible ways that the 
tool might present information. The drawings are intended to be indicative of 
how the view might look in a window. Feel free to add your ideas or 
suggestions.


OVERVIEW:

 
This view displays cumulative information about the application, for example 
(these are only serving suggestions), Total allocations, Fragmentation, page 
faults, MM activity. 

Each activity is displayed on a vertical axis (each with independent scaling).  
This forms a plane when cast along the x axis being used for time.  The time 
axis also carries labels generated from user labels. The z axis moves from left 
to right as time progresses.

The total allocation plane may its self be broken down into smaller allocation 
charts coloured by there assigned lable colour.

.interaction. 

Double clicking on a chart might bring up a more detailed view.

clicking in the annotation area (bottom left) might create a dialogue box 
allowing new allocations to be added.

Dragging a plan may permit the vertical plane's order to be reorganised.

It should also be possible to hide and add new charts. 

How about, creating an formula chart which might apply an expression to one or 
more chart values (e.g. square root of allocations * allocation time) useful or 
too clever ?

Cumlative information is any information which can be described by one number 
which might change over time. 


TESTING:

One way of testing these diagrams is to ask your self if the function of the 
chart was immediately obvious after looking at the diagram ? Could you think of 
a use for the view might you find this view useful. If you think of ways of 
improving the chart and adding more elements too it them again it might be more 
useful than one you cannot think of adding too.


ATTACHMENT:

   "CUMULA~1.VSD"


