       PROCEDURE FOR MAKING UNREQUESTED CHANGES TO WORKING SOURCE
                     proc.dev.change.working-source
                            incomplete proc
                           gavinm 1998-04-27


INTRODUCTION

.intro: Most modifications that enter our code base are subject to 
documentation and approval processes.  We don't, however, require that all are, 
as our configuration management process (and supporting software) is somewhat 
heavyweight.  This procedure documents a lighter-weight alternative to be used 
advisedly.

.readership: This procedure is for use by any MM Developer.


DEFINITIONS

.def.working-source: Working source is any branch used as the basis for product 
release.  Working sources are defined in a field in the relevant release 
document.  In practice, this means the trunk, and all release branches 
(particularly their tips).

.def.unrequested: An unrequested change is one that is not done as part of an 
MM Evolution (DARWIN) request and change.


PROCEDURE

.check: Check that you are doing this unrequested change to working source 
advisedly.  You should think particularly about the following points:
  .check.parallel: Might someone else already be working on the same thing?
  .check.disrupt: Might this disrupt anyone else working on or relying on this 
working source?
  .check.risk: Is there a significant risk that the change will have unforseen 
side-effects?
  .check.port: Might this change need porting to other working sources?
  .check.release: Are we likely to want to know later whether this change forms 
part of a particular release?
  .check.retract: Is is plausible that we might want to retract this change?
  .check.imminent: Is a release of this working source due within about a week?
If the answer to any of these questions is "yes", then you should consider 
using MM Evolution instead of this process.

.change: Make the changes to the working source.

.approve: Consider asking for someone to approve the changes, either directly, 
or via management.

.announce: Announce the changes to an appropriate mailing list (usually "mm", 
although a specialised list has been suggested), specifying:
  .announce.desc: A description of the changes made;
  .announce.just: A justification for the changes;
  .announce.changes: A list of files changes, with version numbers;
  .announce.approve: Any action taken under .approve.


