                      LEVEL 3 -- THE DEFINED LEVEL
                         paper.sei93.level3.dup
                             obsolete quote
                           gavinm 1997-06-23

From pages O-14 - O-15 of paper.sei93:

At the Defined Level, the standard process for developing and maintaining 
software across the organization is documented, including both software 
engineering and management processes, and these processes are integrated into a 
coherent whole. This standard process is referred to throughout the CMM as the 
organization's standard software process. Processes established at Level 3 are 
used (and changed, as appropriate) to help the software managers and technical 
staff perform more effectively. The organization exploits effective software 
engineering practices when standardizing its software processes. There is a 
group that is responsible for the organization's software process activities, 
e.g., a software engineering process group, or SEPG [Fowler90]. An 
organization-wide training program is implemented to ensure that the staff and 
managers have the knowledge and skills required to fulfill their assigned roles.

Projects tailor the organization's standard software process to develop their 
own defined software process, which accounts for the unique characteristics of 
the project. This tailored process is referred to in the CMM as the project's 
defined software process. A defined software process contains a coherent, 
integrated set of well-defined software engineering and management processes. A 
well-defined process can be characterized as including readiness criteria, 
inputs, standards and procedures for performing the work, verification 
mechanisms (such as peer reviews), outputs, and completion criteria. Because 
the software process is well defined, management has good insight into 
technical progress on all projects.

The software process capability of Level 3 organizations can be summarized as 
standard and consistent because both software engineering and management 
activities are stable and repeatable. Within established product lines, cost, 
schedule, and functionality are under control, and software quality is tracked. 
This process capability is based on a common, organization-wide understanding 
of the activities, roles, and responsibilities in a defined software process.

