       ANALYSIS OF THE STAKEHOLDER INTERESTS OF THE BOOK PROJECT
                             interest.book
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-04-10

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document describes the stakeholders of the book project 
(project.book, that is the people who have an interest (postitive or negative) 
in the success of the MM Book.  Stakeholder analysis is a new thing for the MM 
Group, but it is intended to be a stage before goal determination, which is a 
justification for the goal set.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.book.

.hist.0: These details were initially thrashed out with GavinM, Richard, PTW, 
and AndrewS  on 1997-04-10, and written up by GavinM.


STAKEHOLDERS


Publisher

.pub: The publisher (Addison-Wesley) has as a mission statement, "to provide 
distinctive learning resources that exceed our customers' expectations".  We 
believe they want to make an immediate profit, while broadening the technical 
range of their list, and enhancing their image.

.pub.contact: Our main contact with the publisher is Peter Gordon.  We have no 
direct knowledge of his goals for this relationship, but we can deduce that he 
wants the publisher's goals (see .pub) to be visibly met, and also to enjoy the 
experience.


Harlequin

.hqn: Harlequin wants to make money, and also to enhance its image.

.hqn.mm: The MM Group want to broaden the market for their product, broaden 
their own market share, promote good memory management practice, enhance the 
image of Harlequin as MM experts, and produce the best possible MM Product.

.hqn.ptw: Tucker wants to broaden his own experience, gain a sense of 
accomplishment, become more famous, and improve his standing within Harlequin

.hqn.andrews: AndrewS wants to improve his professional status and technical 
knowledge,  broaden his technical writing experience, and do interesting and 
novel things.

.hqn.skeene: Sonya (representing Jo) wants Harlequin to publish more books.

.hqn.lang: The various language groups, such as Dylan, want people to be able 
to use their products effectively and to choose to use languages with advanced 
features.

.hqn.marcomm: MarComm want to be able to market Harlequin products effectively 
and in an informed way.

.hqn.support: Support want people to have a better understanding of technical 
issues.


Harlequin Customers

.cust.lang: Customers of Harlequin's language products, such as Dylan, want to 
understand how to use them effectively.

.cust.mm: Customers of the MM Product want to be able to use it effectively.

.cust.other: Customers of other Harlequin products, such as Scriptworks or 
Watson, are unlikely to have much interest in a book on memory management.


Readership

.readers: All readers will want the book to be entertaining, easy to read, and 
informative.

.readers.prog: Readers who are computer programmers will want to be informed 
about their use and choice of various computer languages, platforms, tools, and 
programming paradigms.


Competitors

.comp.mm: MM's competitors are people like Geodesic, MicroQuill, and Academics 
such as Boehm.  They want the MM Product to fail, but they also want the MM 
market to become larger.

.comp.other: Other companies, such as those producing Purify and debugging 
tools, will gain from an expansion of the MM marketplace, but have little 
interest in the success of the MM Product.

