               SUMMARY OF FIRST EP QA MEETING, 1995-12-05
                       meeting.epcore.1995-12-05
                               draft doc
                            nickb 1995-12-05

.intro: On Tuesday 5th December 1995, Nick Barnes and Richard Brooksby met Mike 
Cox and Mamye Kratt (Mamye attending by phone) to discuss SW-QA involvement in 
the MM/EP-core project. This document is a summary of that meeting.
.scope: The scope of the meeting was:
.scope.comm: Communicate the current state of the MM/EP-core project, including 
the requirements (req.epcore), to SW-QA.
.scope.req: Discuss means of testing the MM/EP-core requirements.
.scope.plan: Plan future SW-QA/MM collaboration on this project:
.scope.plan.init: Setting up an initial build/test platform and suites, so that 
MM development can begin. MM would like to see this happen in 1995.
.scope.plan.future: Maintaining and developing MM/EPcore test suites.
.scope.manage: Discuss SW-QA management support for MM/EPcore project
effort.
.goal: The goals of the meeting were:
.goal.req: Agree changes to the requirements document so that the requirements 
are testable, without losing requirement coverage.
.goal.plan: Agree a plan of action for SW-QA and MM in designing, implementing, 
using and maintaining MM/EPcore build platform and test suites.
.goal.manage: Establish SW-QA management support for any plan agreed.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
.req: The requirements document req.epcore was discussed, with a view to 
identifying ways in which the requirements could be tested. It was noted that 
many requirements are trivial to test (e.g. by booting the RIP, by running any 
small job).
.req.image: It was noted that there was no requirement that images produced by 
ScriptWorks should be unaltered by the memory manager. This is an omission.
.req.time: The run-time and throughput requirements were discussed at length. 
.req.time.ats: The full Genoa ATS tests are probably inappropriate for timing 
tests. See .genoa.
.req.rel: SW-QA do not currently quantify the reliability of the RIP. Sets of 
tests are run for a few days or weeks. It seems unlikely that 
req.epcore.attr.rel, or any close approximation, can be tested at all. Testing 
ten RIPs for one week (1680 hours) might be possible. SW-QA shall look into the 
whole issue of reliability testing in more detail.
.req.test.fun: Mamye will go through the functionality requirements with one or 
more EP developers, and compile a list of suitable and representative tests.
.req.test.ps: It was noted that some requirements are not testable by running 
PostScript jobs (e.g. req.epcore.fun.dl.free.any). Some of these can readily be 
tested by writing a suitable C test harness. Such testing will be the 
responsibility of the MM group.
.req.test.multi: Mamye will consider the question of multi-processor testing: 
What is different on multi-processor platforms? How can it best be tested?
.req.test.multi.advice: David Gilday and Paul Butcher are EP developers who can 
advise MM on multi-processor memory-management issues for ScriptWorks.
.req.platform: req.epcore.dc.hw.current and req.epcore.dc.os.sw require a list 
of ScriptWorks hardware/OS platforms. Mamye shall provide such a list.
.genoa: The Genoa test suites were discussed. 
.genoa.size: Genoa ATS is a huge set of tests, taking several days to run. 
Consequently, it cannot (and is not) run often. Certainly we cannot use the 
whole of ATS in MM/EP-core development.
.genoa.subset: Possibly some subset of Genoa ATS could be used. Mamye will talk 
to Chuck Berry about selecting a suitable subset.
.genoa.license: The licensing for Genoa ATS is expensive, and Harlequin only 
holds a license to run the tests at 1cc.
.platform: Suitable platforms for MM group development and testing were 
discussed. 
.platform.customer: most customers use PCs or Macs.
.platform.devel: Nick will be doing much of the development, and will need a 
suitable machine.
.platform.devel.ep: EP development can be done on any machine, but is generally 
done on a PC running Windows NT.
.platform.devel.now: Nick currently has a SparcStation running SunOS. To what 
extent this ML machine should be used for MM/EP-core development is unclear. 
Richard will work to resolve this. It is clear that small amounts of 
development can be done on this machine, and that it is appropriate for the 
task.
.platform.devel.future: Mamye will ask around for machine recommendations for a 
new MM machine.
.platform.test: MM will need to run some tests on Macs and PCs as sanity checks.
.plan.soon: MM (Nick) needs to be able to build the RIP and run some simple 
test jobs in the near future. Mamye shall advise on building and running on 
Sparc/SunOS. It is possible that Mamye should come over fairly soon (January?) 
to help with these initial stages.
.plan.deliver: MM will need to run some tests during development and before 
delivery of each MM/EP-core deliverable. These will form a subset of the 
complete set of MM/EP-core tests. The complete set of tests will form an 
additional testing resource for SW-QA's testing process.
.manage.resource: Richard will arrange to meet Yoryos and Chuck Berry to 
discuss use of SW-QA resources for the MM/EP-core project.


