                     DESIGN VERSION OF WEB PRODUCT
                           version.web.design
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1996-11-19

INTRODUCTION

.purpose: The purpose of the design version is to allow the Design Group to 
assess the design of the pages and give some feedback before 
version.web.internal.

.req: The requirememts for the Design release are poorly specified, but are 
similar to, but not necessarily as high as those for version.web.internal (see 
meeting.web.1996-11-12.chart).

.contact: The Design Group contact is AndiH.

.plan: The Design release is planned for 1996-11-19 (see 
meeting.web.1996-11-18.rel.design).

.status: The Design release was made at 1996-11-19 12:18 UT.


RELEASE NOTES

.notes: From mail.gavinm.1996-11-19.12-13:

The Memory Management Group intend to release a set of web pages to the
outside world.  These pages are on-line reference material on the subject
of memory management, principally a glossary, bibliography, and FAQ.

We're releasing the pages to the Design Group for an internal review, and
we'd appreciate your comments.  The pages will be available as
<URL:http://webhost.long.harlequin.co.uk/%7Emm/external/>.

The purpose of a review is to find inconsistencies between the goals and
the pages, or to improve the goals.

The goals of the pages are:
  - to promote Harlequin as a centre of expertise on the subject,
  - to generate interest in Harlequin products (contacts and sales),
  - to broaden and improve the image of Harlequin,
  - to increase the memory management market by promoting good practice,
  - to increase our potential market share by promoting our memory
    management practices (garbage collection, in particular).

(A fairly full analysis of these goals can be found in the Memory
Management Information database (PROJECTS\MEMMAN\MMINFO2.NSF) under
meeting.web.1996-11-12.)

The content of the pages is believed to be accurate.  The Doc Group are
currently proofreading all the pages, so please ignore minor superficial
errors.  (Doc are pretty thorough and you'd only slow us down.)  The
Bibliography, News, and Links are likely to be incomplete; additions are
welcome.  The Glossary has some known (and indicated) areas of
incompleteness, on many of which work is currently in preparation; please
consult mm-web before making lengthy contributions.

We intend to release the pages for review by the rest of Harlequin on
Friday.  There is an external beta release planned for the 6th December,
and full release on the 16th.

Please send all comments to mm-web.

