 INITIAL MEETING FOR MEMORY MANAGEMENT EXTERNAL WEB PAGES -- 1996-06-21
                         meeting.web.1996-06-21
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1996-06-21

.attendees: russellg, cliveh, richard, gavinm

.aim: The pupose of making memory management information available externally 
on the Web is to provide free resources that will attract people to the site 
and cause Harlequin to become associated with memory management technology and 
expertise. 

.style: The site should appear to be an independant resource such as an 
individual or academic might maintain; it should not have a corporate 
appearance.  This may or may not involve having a significantly different 
format to Harlequin's other pages. 

.sell: The resource would not initially attempt to sell anything (except 
perhaps consultancy).  

.vapourware: Eventually there would be information on Harlequin's MPS, but not 
until a product was ready

.current: There isn't currently much memory management information available on 
the Web and the market will be easy to dominate.  Ben Zorn has some stuff on 
garbage collection(http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~zorn/DSA.html).  We have the 
opportunity to create _the_ site.  This sort of thing hasn't been done before 
because the memory management markey has only recently become popular and we're 
doing ground-breaking stuff.  There is a lot of information already on the Web, 
but it is scattered.

.competitors: Our competitors would like to do this sort of thing.  Geodesic 
(http://www.geodesic.com/)already have an FAQ to go with Great Circle.  
MicroQuill/SmartHeap (http://www.microquill.com/) and Pure/Purify 
(http://www.pure.com/) also have Web sites.   

.target: The site will be aimed at developers and development managers and also 
to academics.  All these could lead to useful contacts.

.advertise: We want to become a point of contact for memory management.  We 
need to register with Yahoo and Alta-Vista and announce the site on mailing 
lists and newsgroups.

.organization: The pages will be a section of their own, readily accessible 
from the Harlequin root.  Possibly there may be a separate host name such as 
"memory-management.org" or "mm.org".

.content: The information available should be much broader than just our 
product.  We should probably confine ourselves, however, to application memory 
management (as opposed to hardware or operating systems) in order to stay 
within our expertise.

.content.secret: The suggestions below are, of course, subject to any 
trade-secret considerations for internal information.  In general, they apply 
to information which is already publically available.

.content.products: The resource must not harm Harlequin's commercial 
interests.  Consequently, it must not include a list of available products or 
information on or links to competitors.  When MPS is available as a product, we 
might reconsider this for, e.g. comparative studies.

.content.papers: We want to provide informations on relevant papers.  This 
should include abstracts, links to online copies, extracts or HTML copies where 
appropriate and a search engine.  Richard is working on getting permission to 
use Paul Wilson's papers.

.content.technical-information: We can provide technical information on memory 
management that we have developed (other than secret stuff).

.content.own-publications: We can provide online copies of our own publications.

.content.data: We could provide some useful public data we have gathered for 
internal use.  This might include OS-specific information or links to it.

.content.links: In general, we want to provide links to other relevant 
information on the Web (but see .competitors).  Such links should be 
accompanied by descriptive text.

.content.news: We could provide a news service, noting events in the memory 
management world, including conferences.

.content.faq: We could provide FAQs on aspects of memory management.  We could 
solicit questions (see .mail)

.content.bibliography: We could provide abstracts and reviews for relevant 
books.  We already collect this information internally.

.content.advocacy: We could provide articles dispelling some of the myths about 
memory allocation, e.g. garbage collection making things slower.  These could 
provide useful references for potential clients.

.mail: We should provide an e-mail address for memory management related 
queries and comments.  It would do no harm to solicit contributions.

.mailing-list: We could provide a mailing list for general discussion of memory 
management.

.manpower: The labour divides into content, preparation and implementation.

.manpower.content: The gathering and writing of the information and the basic 
markup will be done by the memory management group, principally Gavin.

.manpower.presentation: The material will be brought in line with Harlequin's 
image by Marketing, principally Russell.

.manpower.implementation: The web pages will be provided on the Web by Systems.

.schedule: We should start producing initial pages for review and internal 
publication by mid-July and launch the site in August.  It is more important 
for the site to be large and effective when launched than for it to be launched 
to schedule (see .repeat-visit).

.repeat-visit: We need to encourage people to return to the site and also to 
explore other Harlequin products.  The former could be acheived by providing a 
link to URL-Minder (http://www.netmind.com/URL-minder/URL-minder.html) and 
providing an updates mailing list.

.logo: We need to find a distinct logo for memory management.  E.g. an elephant 
with a knotted trunk.  We need to avoid associating ponderous and clumsy 
pachyderms with our product, however. 

.other: We also discussed Harlequin's Web site in general, Java animations and 
HBI, but the author has excluded these topics from these minutes.

