                PROCEDURE FOR BOOKING ABSENCE IN ADVANCE
                           proc.absence.book
                             obsolete proc
                           gavinm 1998-07-14


INTRODUCTION

.intro: Harlequin has general holiday procedures that will shortly be published 
in an employee handbook.  At some point in the future, holiday requests will be 
made via a Spring database.  This document describes the MM Group specific 
procedure for booking absence, and does not supercede any company procedures.

.readership: Any member of the MM group.

.def.absence: This document talks of "absence".  In practice, this is usually 
holiday, but the procedure can be used for planned sick leave, or unpaid leave, 
with the obvious modifications.


AUTHORIZATION

.auth: For holiday requests, authorization is required, depending on the number 
of consecutive working days involved.  This changes from time to time, but the 
current values are:
  (0,11] - Group Manager, Divisional Manager
  (11,15] - Group Manager, Divisional Manager, Operational Management
  (15,oo) - Group Manager, Divisional Manager, Operational Management, Board
All unpaid leave must be authorized by Operational Management.  [Is that true?  
gavinm 1998-07-14]


PROCEDURE


Preliminary checks

.check.entitlement: It is the requestor's responsibility to check that he has 
enough holiday entitlement to cover the request.  This will be double-checked 
eventually by your holiday administrator, but doesn't form part of the 
management authorization process.


Request Mail

.mail: Send a mail message to your group manager.  This should explain clearly:
  - The dates of the absence;
  - The class of absence (e.g. holiday, sick leave, unpaid leave);
  - The total number of contiguous working days being absented, including any 
authorized in a previous request.

.mail.div-man: In the event that the Group Manager is absent, and will continue 
to be so for a significant period, then the request should be sent directly to 
the Divisional Manager, pointing out this fact.

.mail.just: In the case of unpaid leave, or long holiday, you are recommended 
to add a short justification.

.mail.cc.vac: Your request mail should be CC'd to your local vacation mailing 
list (uk-vac, us-vac, or oz-vac).

.mail.cc.other: Unless you wish the details of your absence to be 
confidentional, you should CC anyone affected by your absence.  This will 
normally be "mm".  Your choice in this CC will be respected by the recipients, 
but the group will be advised of your absence.

.mail.cc.not: Although your leave must be authorised by the Divisional Manager, 
and may need to be authorised by Operational Management and the Board, do not 
CC them in your original request.  In general, requests should be authorized at 
each level, before being forwarded to the next.

.mail.subject: It is helpful if your subject includes the following:
  - The phrase "Holiday request" (or whatever);
  - Your name;
  - A summary of the dates involved.

.mail.advance: It is helpful if your request is made as far in advance as 
possible, as that gives the maximum flexibility to arrange schedules around 
holiday, instead of the other way about.


Group Manager's Reply

.reply.approve: Your group manager will normally forward your request to the 
Divisional Manager with a statement of his approval, CC'd to all original 
recipients and the originator, and may append additional comments.

.reply.reject: [I haven't done this yet, so I don't know what will happen.  
gavinm 1998-07-14]


Further Interaction

.reply.swither: In some cases, senior management may wish further details to 
support an unusual request.  This will happen through the Group Manager.


