                    INTERNAL VERSION OF WEB PRODUCT
                          version.web.internal
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1996-11-19

INTRODUCTION

.purpose: The purpose of the internal release is to allow everyone in Harlequin 
to review the Web pages and give feedback before version.web.beta.

.req: The requirememts for the internal release are specified in 
meeting.web.1996-11-12.chart.

.plan: The Design release is planned for 1996-11-22 Friday (see 
meeting.web.1996-11-18.rel.internal).

.slip: The Design release has slipped to 1996-11-26 Tuesday (see 
mail.gavinm.1996-11-22.12-16 ).


RELEASE NOTES

.notes:

The Memory Management Group intend to release a set of web pages to the
outside world.  These pages are on-line reference material on the subject
of memory management, principally a glossary, bibliography, and FAQ.

We're releasing the pages to Harlequin for an internal review, and
we'd appreciate your comments.  The pages will be available as
  <URL:http://webhost.long.harlequin.co.uk/%7Emm/external/>

The purpose of a review is to find inconsistencies between the goals and
the pages, or to improve the goals.

The goals of the pages are:
  - to promote Harlequin as a centre of expertise on the subject;
  - to generate interest in Harlequin products (contacts and sales);
  - to broaden and improve the image of Harlequin;
  - to increase the memory management market by promoting good practice;
  - to increase our potential market share by promoting our memory
    management practices (garbage collection, in particular).

(A fairly full analysis of these goals can be found in the Memory
Management Information database (PROJECTS\MEMMAN\MMINFO2.NSF) under
meeting.web.1996-11-12.)

The content of the pages is believed to be accurate.  The Doc Group are
currently proofreading all the pages, so please ignore minor superficial
errors.  (Doc are pretty thorough.)  The Bibliography, News, and Links 
are likely to be incomplete; additions are welcome.  The Glossary has 
some known (and indicated) areas of incompleteness, on many of which 
work is currently in preparation; please consult mm-web before making 
lengthy contributions.

We intend to release the pages for review by external experts in memory
management (Beta Release) on 1996-12-06 Friday, and release them 
officially (Launch Release) on 1996-12-16 Monday.

Please send all comments to mm-web.  This alias is connected to a 
call-tracking database.

