                GUIDE TO CLASSIFICATION OF REVIEW ISSUES
                           guide.review.class
                            incomplete guide
                           gavinm 1997-06-12

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document describes the classification used for issues when 
checking (see proc.review.check) and logging (see proc.review.log).

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in MM-style formal 
review.


CLASSIFICATION

.class: There are many possible schemes for defect classification, but only a 
coarse one is used here.  Any issue raised, must fall into one of the following 
classes.  The normal abbreviation is indicated.


Major Defects

.major: (M): A Major defect is a defect in the Product document that will 
probably have significantly increased costs to find and fix later in the 
development process, for example in testing or in use (from book.gilb93(2) 
p442).  A bug that is fixed after review typically takes one man-hour, after 
testing 10 man-hour, and in the field 100 man-hours.  A defect that will waste 
downstream development effort is also major.  Typical major defects are:
    - In an implementation, potentially failing to behave as specified; 
    - In an implementation, failing to validate foriegn data;
    - In a high-level document, being likely to cause major defects in derived 
documents.


Minor Defects

.minor: (m): A minor defect is any defect in the Product document whose cost to 
fix does not increase in time.  If there is a typo, then it doesn't matter when 
it's fixed.  Typical minor defects are:
    - In an implementation, poor variable names;
    - In any human-readable text, typos where the meaning is clear.


Comments

.comment: (C): A comment is any remark about the Product Document.  Typical 
comments are:
    - Suggestions for how an algorithm could be optimised in future;
    - Praise.


Questions to the Author

.question: (q): A question is any matter that a Checker wants clarification 
on.  If a Product document is unclear to the intended readership then that is a 
major or minor defect.  Questions will be answered in writing; answering them 
often spawns changes anyway.  Typical questions are:
    - Clarifications on why things should be the way they are;
    - Curiosity about the details of something.


Improvement Suggestions

.imp: (I): An improvement suggestion is any potential defect found in documents 
other than the Product document.  Typical improvement suggestions are:
    - Defects in source documents;
    - Defects in rule sets, check lists, or procedures.


New Defects

.new: (N): Any issue found during logging (as opposed to during checking) is a 
new issue.  This classification is orthogonal to the preceding.  It is 
important to mark new issues, in order to measure how worthwhile group logging 
sessions are (see proc.review.log.just).

