                 A DISCIPLINE FOR SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
                           Watts S. Humphrey
                        Addison-Wesley, 01/03/95
     http://www.aw.com/cseng/authors/humphrey/disseng/disseng.html,
           ftp://ftp.aw.com//cseng/authors/humphrey/disseng/

                            book.humphrey95
                                 draft
                           richard 1997-01-29


ABSTRACT:

This new work from Watts Humphrey, author of the influential book, "Managing 
the Software Process" [book.humphrey89], broadens his orderly view of software 
process management, and lays the foundation for a disciplined approach to 
software engineering.  In his earlier book, the author developed concrete 
methods for managing software development and maintenance.  These methods, now 
commonly practiced in industry, provide programmers and managers with specific 
steps they can take to evaluate and improve the software capabilities.  In this 
new book, Humphrey scales those methods down to a personal level, helping 
software engineers develop the skills and habits needed to plan, track, and 
analyze large, complex projects.

Humphrey and others have used material from this book to train professionals 
and students around the world in a projects-oriented software engineering 
course.  First establishing the need for discipline in software engineering, 
and the benefits to practitioners of learning ho to manager their personal 
software process, Humphrey then develops a model than they can use to monitor, 
test, and improve their work.  Examples drawn from industry enhance the 
practical focus of the book, while project exercises give the readers the 
opportunity to practice software process management as they learn it.

Features

  - Presents concepts and method for a disciplined software engineering process.

  - Scales down industrial practices for planning, tracking, analysis, and 
defect management to fit the needs of small-scale program development.

  - Shows how small project disciplines provide a solid base for larger 
projects.

REVIEWS:

The preface, introduction, and chapters 1 and 2 concord with everything I've 
been saying for the past few years.  -- richard, 1997-01-29

ATTACHMENT
   "forms.pdf"

