                     OVERVIEW OF PROCESS DOCUMENTS
                            overview.process
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-17

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document provides an overview of the parts of MM Group process, 
and the documents that comprise it.  This applies to the most recent release of 
the process product (release.process.baseline).  [looks more like an analysis 
than an overview to me.  drj 1998-11-16]

.readership: This document is intended for any Harlequin employee working with 
or merely interested in MM group process.

.source: The process areas outlines in this document are based on those defined 
as part of the SEI Capability Maturity Model.  See in particular paper.sei93("
Key Practices of the Capability Maturity Model, Version 1.1"), pages O-19 
(reproduced in .kpa.table, below) and O-25.  Where we have not used the SEI 
terminology, I have indicated our term in brackets.  The areas are divided by 
CMM level.  We are roughly approaching Level 2, but have made progress 
inconsistent with these levels.  [where can we find an introduction/reference 
for CMM terminology?  (apart from the huge paper that is).  drj 1998-11-16]


.kpa.table: Here is essentially a reproduction of Figure 2.4 from paper.sei93 
(page O-19).

Process Categories

Levels	Management
	
	Software Project Planning, management, etc	Organizational
		
		Senior management review, etc.	Engineering
			
			Requirements analysis, design, code, test, etc.
5 Optimizing		Technology Change Management
		Process Change Management	Defect Prevention
4 Managed	Quantitative Process Management		Software Quality Management
3 Defined	Integrated Software Management
	Intergroup Coordination	Organization Process Focus
		Organization Process Definition
		Training Program	Software Product Engineering
			Peer Reviews
2 Repeatable	Requirements Management
	Software Project Planning
	Software Project Tracking & Oversight
	Software Subcontract Management
	Software Quality Assurance
	Software Configuration Management		
1 Initial	Ad hoc processes		


LEVEL 2: REPEATABLE


Requirements Management

.req-man: "The purpose of Requirements Management is to establish a common 
understanding between the customer and the software project of the customer's 
requirements that will be addressed by the software project."  Page L2-1, 
paper.sei93.

Whilst we have some experience of requirements management, this process is 
under-documented.  guide.req gives some guidance on the expression of 
requirements, and rule.req give rules for them.


Software Project Planning

.proj-plan: "The purpose of Software Project Planning is to establish 
reasonable plans for performing the software engineering and for managing the 
software project."  Page L2-11, paper.sei93.

Our planning process is underdeveloped and undocumented.


Software Project Tracking & Oversight

.proj-track: "The purpose of Software Project Tracking and Oversight is to 
provide adequate visibility into actual progress so that management can take 
effective actions when the software project's performance deviates 
significantly from the software plans."  Page L2-31, paper.sei93.

Our tracking process is underdeveloped and undocumented.


Software Subcontract Management

.sub-man: "The purpose of Software Subcontract Management is to select 
qualified software subcontractors and manage them effectively."  Page L2-45, 
paper.sei93.

We do no software subcontracting, except for services.  This process is 
undeveloped.


Software Quality Assurance

.qa: "The purpose of Software Quality Assurance is to provide management with 
appropriate visibility into the process being used by the software project and 
of the products being built."  Page L2-63, paper.sei93.

We have documents which describe the process of QA, but they are incomplete, 
and not all integrated into the process product.  See the areas of 
process.darwin concerned with QA.  [it's unclear from the description of 
Software Quality Assurance that is has anything to do with what harlequin call 
QA  drj 1998-11-26]


Software Configuration Management (Product Evolution/DARWIN)

.pr-ev: "The purpose of Software Configuration Management is to establish and 
maintain the integrity of the products of the software project throughout the 
project's software life cycle."  Page L2-75, paper.sei93.

There is an overview of the process in process.darwin, and an overview of the 
procedures and guides in proc.darwin.  The various product.*, version.*, 
release.*, request.*, and change.* documents form part of the implementation of 
product evolution, using the Spring Group's Darwin database.

Some source management procedures are in proc.dev-branch and proc.add-module.


LEVEL 3: DEFINED


Organization Process Focus

.process-focus: "The purpose of Organization Process Focus is to establish the 
organizational responsibility for software process activities that improve the 
organization's overall software process capability."  Page L3-1, paper.sei93.

This is undeveloped.


Organization Process Definition

.process-def: "The purpose of Organization Process Definition is to develop and 
maintain a usable set of software process assets that improve process 
performance across the projects and provide a basis for cumulative, long-term 
benefits to the organization."  Page L3-11, paper.sei93.

This is undeveloped.


Training Program

.training: "The purpose of the Training Program key process area is to develop 
the skills and knowledge of individuals so they can performs their roles 
effectively and efficiently."  Page L3-25, paper.sei93.

This is undeveloped.


Integrated Software Management

.soft-man: "The purpose of Integrated Software Management is to integrate the 
software engineering and management activities into a coherent, defined 
software process that is tailored from the organization's standard software 
process and related process assets, which are described in Organization Process 
Definition."  Page L3-37, paper.sei93.

This is undeveloped.


Software Product Engineering

.prod-eng: "The purpose of Software Product Engineering is to consistently 
perform a well-defined engineering process that integrates all the software 
engineering activities to produce correct, consistent software products 
effectively and efficiently."  Page L3-59, paper.sei93.

This is underdeveloped and undocumented.  Build procedures are listed in 
proc.build.  The guides for C implementation are listed in guide.impl.c.


Intergroup Coordination

.coord: "The purpose of Intergroup Coordination is to establish a means for the 
software engineering group to participate actively with the other engineering 
groups so the project is better able to satisfy the customer's needs 
effectively and efficiently."  Page L3-85, paper.sei93.

This is undeveloped.


Peer Reviews (Review/Inspection)

.review: "The purpose of Peer Reviews is to remove defects from the software 
work products early and efficiently.  An important corollary effect is to 
develop a better understanding of the software work products and of defects 
that might be prevented."  Page L3-97, paper.sei93.

Formal review, also known as Inspection, is the process whereby documents are 
checked against themselves, source documents,  and rules at the request of the 
authors, finding defects and process improvements, and an estimation of the 
quality of documents.  Review is important both in providing defect-removal 
upstream of testing and customer bugs, and in defect-prevention still further 
upstream.  There is an overview of the review process in process.review which 
also lists available guides, and overview of the procedures in proc.review, and 
ranges of rule sets [Notes4-specific link], checklists [Notes4-specific link], 
and roles (see role.*).  In support of review, edit sessions assist people in 
their commitment to follow-up; see proc.edit-session.


LEVEL 4: MANAGED


Quantitative Process Management

.quant: "The purpose of Quantitative Process Management is to control the 
process performance of the software project quantitatively.  Software process 
performance represents the actual results achieved from following a software 
process."  Page L4-1, paper.sei93.

This is underdeveloped, and undocumented.


Software Quality Management

.quality-man: "The purpose of Software Quality Management is to develop a 
quantitative understanding of the quality of the project's software products 
and achieve specific quality goals."  Page L4-19, paper.sei93.

This is underdeveloped, and undocumented.


LEVEL 5: OPTIMIZING


Defect Prevention

.defect-prev: "The purpose of Defect Prevention is to identify the cause of 
defects and prevent them from recurring."  Page L5-1, paper.sei93.

This is partly achieved from formal review (see .review), but is 
underdeveloped, and underdocumented.


Technology Change Management

.tech-change: "The purpose of Technology Change Management is to identify new 
technologies (i.e. tools, methods, and processes) and track them into the 
organization in an orderly manner.

This process is undeveloped.


Process Change Management

.proc-change: "The purpose of Process Change Management is to continually 
improve the software processes used in the organization with the intent of 
improving software quality, increasing productivity, and decreasing the cycle 
time for product development."  Page L5-33, paper.sei93.

This is underdeveloped, and undocumented. The process project itself is 
represented in project.process.  It's goals are in goal.process.  An inventory 
of documents is in inventory.process, and there is an overview in 
overview.process (this document!).


OTHER

.other: The following don't seem to fit neatly into the categories above.


Information Management

.info: Information Management is mediated by the MM Information System, 
composed of the Spring database MM Information and others, and the MM compounds 
in Hope.  Information on their use is available in the About and Using help 
pages and also in design.infosys, design.infosys.keywords, guide.bib.paper, 
guide.tag, guide.text, proc.bib.

