                   L3: INTEGRATED SOFTWARE MANAGEMENT
                                kpa.ism
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Integrated Software 
Management, a key area of Level 3 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Integrated Software Management is to integrate the 
software engineering and management activities into a coherent, defined 
software process that is tailored from the organization's standard software 
process and related process assets, which are described in Organization Process 
Definition.

Integrated Software Management involves developing the project's defined 
software process and managing the software project using this defined software 
process. The project's defined software process is tailored from the 
organization's standard software process to address the specific 
characteristics of the project.

The software development plan is based on the project's defined software 
process and describes how the activities of the project's defined software 
process will be implemented and managed. The management of the software 
project's size, effort, cost, schedule, staffing, and other resources is tied 
to the tasks of the project's defined software process.  Since the projects' 
defined software processes are all tailored from the organization's standard 
software process, the software projects can share process data and lessons 
learned.

The basic practices for estimating, planning, and tracking a software project 
are described in the Software Project Planning and Software Project Tracking 
and Oversight key process areas. They focus on recognizing problems when they 
occur and adjusting the plans and/or performance to address the problems. The 
practices of this key process area build on, and are in addition to, the 
practices of those two key process areas. The emphasis of Integrated Software 
Management shifts to anticipating problems and acting to prevent or minimize 
the effects of these problems.


GOALS

.goal.version: The project's defined software process is a tailored version of 
the organization's standard software process.

.goal.plan: The project is planned and managed according to the project's 
defined software process.

