                     THE ALLOCATION FREQUENCY VIEW
                     design.product.tool.mostalloc
                           incomplete design
                            sheep 1997-06-11


INTRODUCTION:

This document is intended as a way of thinking about possible ways that the 
tool might present information. The drawings are intended to be indicative of 
how the view might look in a window. Feel free to add your ideas or 
suggestions.


OVERVIEW:

This view is possibly the first view which the user sees

.description.  Each vertical bar represents allocations of a particular size in 
bytes the width is a constant, the height of the bar represents a number of 
allocations of that size (see .moreOptions). The Bars with bold boarders are 
the top 4 allocations. The top 4 allocations are the ones used to create a the 
inline Customalloc style fast allocators ( Questions - should the user be 
allowed to change these allocations ? ). 

Some where on the display is a legend converting the colours to the user 
defined comments. 

.interaction. 
 
Zooming in may be necessary (depending upon the number of allocation points in 
the code). No special actions are necessasy on zooming except 
   a. Including a scroll bar if nessasry.
   b. The width remains a constant but the spacing increases.
  

selection (single click).   Items which are selected would display there 
information such as allocation location and type (if known). 

              
.options. 
The vertical axis represents allocation frequency ( i.e. number of items of 
that size which have been allocated). It might also be useful to display by 
total allocations (i.e. size * total allocations). This might be useful in 
judging the items which should be look at in a memory conservation exercise ( 
see analysis.task  ). 

Would it be wise to include an option to do the log of the height so that one 
point does not blot out the other allocations though shear number of 
allocations ? 

Display by type - this would replace the information concerning size with type. 


TESTING:

One way of testing these diagrams is to ask your self if the function of the 
chart was immediately obvious after looking at the diagram ? Could you think of 
a use for the view might you find this view useful. If you think of ways of 
improving the chart and adding more elements too it them again it might be more 
useful than one you cannot think of adding too.


ATTACHMENT:

   "ALLOCA~1.VSD"


