             NOTES FROM TELEMETRY DESIGN MEETING 1997-03-04
                       meeting.general.1997-03-04
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-03-04

INTRODUCTION

.intro: DRJ, GavinM, and Richard met to discuss Telemetry status and plans.


AGENDA

.agenda: The agenda for this meeting were as follows:
  - Current status;
  - Gavin's plans;
  - Design stages;
  - Schedule;
  - First step goals.


CURRENT STATUS

.status: The logging code has been regrafted and has some tidying up 
remaining.  The file format is the "wrong shape", having no header and no 
blocking (to support random access).  There are no timestamps.


REQUIREMENTS

.req: The requirements on event logging are as follows:

  .req.debug: Support debugging of the MPS;

  .req.tool: Support the tool;

  .req.replay: Support trace replay;

  .req.profile: Support performance optimization of the MPS for Dylan delivery;

  .req.pm: Support post-mortem, by having events in-core.


DECISIONS

.dec.ann: Don't change the event annotation at this stage.  Whilst there are 
many suggestions, we don't really know enough yet.

.dec.in-core: In-core event buffers will be implemented by duplicating the 
events.  This solves the sequencing problem, and has an insignificant overhead.


PLAN

.plan: The planned steps are, in order:

  .plan.regraft: Regraft the event branch.  Done.

  .plan.merge: Tidy up event brange, merge, and review.

  .plan.ann: Add metering points (annotations); need to ask people and look at 
past problems.

  .plan.dump: Write a simple event dumping tool which will also perform sanity 
checking on emitted event streams.

  .plan.intern: Design and implement interning.

  .plan.format: Design and implement blocked file format, including 
timestamping.  Review.

  .plan.control: Design and implement control/filtering of event types.  This 
should include some consideration of classification of event types.  Review.

  .plan.in-core: Design and implement in-core events.  Review.

  .plan.future: Longer term design.

.plan.not: This plan does not include elements such as:
  - Network stuff;
  - "medium";
  - Interactive stuff.

.plan.estimates: This plan does not include any firm estimates of effort.  
Gavin will prepare estimates of initial stages, based on LOCs.


MANPOWER

.manpower: The meeting has three attendees and lasted around 50 minutes.  The 
notes took 20 minutes to type up.  Total: 3 hours

