           MEETING WITH DOCUMENTATION ABOUT MM WEB 1996-10-29
                         meeting.doc.1996-10-29
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1996-10-31

.purpose: To discuss documentation involvement with the MM web pages for 
proofreading and also to learn about memory management.

.attendees: Gavin Matthews <GavinM> and Leah Bateman <LMB> met by telephone.


CONVERSION TO SPRING FORMAT

.spring: GavinM explained that he is migrating the source for the content of 
the pages into Spring.  It is then converted to HTML by scripts.  Progress is 
as follows:
  .spring.bib: Bibliography: As this is taken from the MM InfoSys, it has 
always been in Spring.  The converted format is now stable.
  .spring.gloss: Glossary: This is now entirely in Spring.  The converted 
format is reasonably stable.
  .spring.faq: FAQ: Conversion to Spring is underway, simultaneous with 
complete rewriting (see .content.faq).  The converted format is still unstable.
  .spring.other: Other: Other pages are not yet in Spring, but trivial 
conversion should be easy.


PREPARATION OF CONTENT

.content: GavinM discussed the progress of the content for the pages:
  .content.bib: The bibliography is essentially complete (barring a few new 
entries), and stable.
  .content.gloss: The glossary is largely complete, but there are still some 
entries which should be written, and many corrections to write up.
  .content.faq: The FAQs are currently being entirely rewritten and will not be 
fit to read until next week at the earliest.
  .content.other: The other pages are complete, but have little content.  [We 
might need to revise the Links - GavinM]


PROOFREADING SCHEDULE

.proof: The schedule for proofreading the pages was discussed.
  .proof.size: GavinM estimated that there would be no more than the equivalent 
of 100 printed pages.
  .proof.time: LMB estimated that at a rate of at least 20 pages/day, it would 
take 3-5 days to review the site.
  .proof.schedule: LMB is busy for the rest of this week, but will be 
relatively flexible thereafter.  She can guarantee to give five days' 
proofreading in the three weeks from Monday 1996-11-04 to Friday 1996-11-22, 
and will try to arrange it before Friday 1996-11-15.
  .proof.order: Given the state of preparation (see .content), it was agreed 
that the proofreading should proceed in the order Bibliography, Glossary, FAQs, 
other.
  .proof.spelling: GavinM explained that one of the main proofreading problems 
was likely to be his inability to spell like an American.  LMB said that would 
leap out at her during proofreading.
  .proof.links: GavinM explained that, because of the tools used, the links 
should all be valid technically, but not necessarily valid semantically.  It 
was agreed that Leah should not spend too much time checking these.
  .proof.format: It was discussed what format LMB should check the pages in.  A 
combination of Web and Spring was agreed.


OTHER

.learn: GavinM explained that, to use the Web pages to learn about memory 
management, it would be better to start with the FAQ, and glossary (but not in 
alphabetical order) and that the bibliography would be unhelpful for this. Leah 
said she could keep everything but the editing portion of her brain off whilst 
proofreading the bibliography.


ACTIONS

.act.mail: GavinM will arrange for LMB to be added to the mm-web mailing list. 
[Request sent to mailmaster - GavinM]

.act.plan: A more detailed schedule for the Web project will be evolved by 
GavinM (and others) early next week.

.act.look: Leah will have a look at the Web pages and Spring database sometime 
this week.

