                   MEETING OF MM/DYLAN ON 1997-11-07
                        meeting.dylan.1997-11-07
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-11-07

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Gavin Matthews <GavinM>, David Jones <DRJ>, and Nick Levine <Nick> met 
with John Hotchkiss <JH>, Jo Blishen <JBlishen>, and Tony Man <tony> to discuss 
future plans for MM/Dylan work.


DYLAN SCHEDULES

.dylan.beta: The Dylan Beta has now slipped to 1997-11-21.

.dylan.product: The full Dylan product will be released around 1998-01-30.

.dylan.product.freeze: A development freeze for the product will be on 
1998-01-10.

.dylan.product.bug-fix: A bug-fix release of the product is expected around one 
or two months after initial release.

.dylan.work: There is minimal feature work expected betwen the beta and the 
product.

.dylan.enterprise: The Enterprise release is expected to enter beta around 
1998-03, with final release in 1998Q2.

.dylan.enterprise.companions: The Personal & Professional releases may be 
re-released when the Enterprise is released.


MM RELEASES AND SCHEDULES

.honeybee: Tony has done some initial performance testing of 
release.dylan.honeybee.7 (not yet fully QA'd).  Results suggest that it is 
still around 5-10% slower than Boehm, but around 6% faster than 
release.dylan.honeybee.4.

.cottonwood: As version.dylan.cottonwood is targetted at the product release, 
and performance issues in the beta are high priority, is was agreed to defer 
the release of version.dylan.cottonwood to Dylan to an absolute deadline of 
1997-12-15, although QA releases will probably be made available somewhat 
earlier.

.weak: The AWL pool still has performance problems affecting the use of 
weakness in  Dylan.  David reckoned that a few days of effort in improving AWL 
can produce significant benefits in a patch release of version.dylan.honeybee 
in time for the full beta.

.space: Tony is investigating cases of memory not being released (under 
circumstances in which Boehm apparently does release it).

.stack-overflow: It was confirmed that req.dylan.prot.stack-overflow would be 
met in version.dylan.cottonwood.


FUTURES

.future: Various future directions for Dylan development were discussed.  The 
more immediate future requirements on MM will be:

.future.control: Control over GC policy to avoid pig-in-the-python problems, 
and meet real time constraints.

.future.tool: Tools to assist in heap management problems.

.future.customers: A shift in emphasis from keeping internal developers happy 
to keeping external customers happy.


NEXT MEETING

.next-meeting: MM/Dylan should meet again in two months' time, when things 
should be more concrete.


EFFORT

.effort: The meeting took around 30 minutes, and 3 man-hours.  Writing and 
checking minutes took another 0.5 man-hours.

