     WHAT IS "OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING"? (1991 REVISED VERSION)
                           Bjarne Stroustrup
                      Bell Laboratories, 01/01/91
                      Comp. Sci. Tech. Rep. No. 160
            http://plan9.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/cstr/160.ps.gz

                           paper.stroustrup91
                                 draft
                             drj 1996-08-15


ABSTRACT:

"Object-Oriented Programming" and "Data Abstraction" have become very common 
terms.  Unfortunately, few people agree on what they mean.  I will offer 
informal definitions that appear to make sense in the context of languages like 
Ada, C++, Modula-2, Simula, and Smalltalk.  The general idea is to equate 
"support for data abstraction" with the ability to define and use new types and 
equate "support for object-oriented programming" with the ability to express 
type hierarchies.  Features necessary to support these programming styles in a 
general purpose programming language will be discussed.  The presentation 
centers around C++ but is not limited to facilities provided by that language.

REVIEWS:

drj: Memory management is not the main topic of this paper, however it
touches the area at a couple of points.  Using the requirements that a
languages must "Run on traditional machine.  Coexist with traditional
operating systems.  Compete with traditional programming languages in
terms of run time eficiency.  Cope with every major application area"
Stroustrup then goes on to rubbish GC (claiming that it can be a
performance and portability bottleneck).  He states "it is feasible to
have a language without garbage collection and then provide sufficient
expressive poer to enable the design of type that maintain their own
storage.  C++ is an example of this".  I feel that Stroustrup attacked
GC on performance grounds without having any hard data to back himself
up; at least he left his comments to a small paragraph towards the end
of the paper.

However, the paper is somewhat dated these days, and Stroustrup now is
of the opinion that GC is useful in a language like C++ (or so I hear).


ATTACHMENT
   "160.PS"

