                    PROCEDURE FOR CHECKING IN REVIEW
                           proc.review.check
                               draft proc
                           gavinm 1997-06-12


INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document descibes the procedure for checking within a formal 
review.

.purpose: This procedure should be executed by anyone asked to be a review 
checker.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone asked to be a review 
checker.  This is likely to include people from outside the group, and is 
usually the first exposure to formal review.


PROCEDURE

Start

.doc: Ensure that you have all the relevant documents.

.ask: Ask the review leader if you have any questions about checking procedure.


Checking

.source: First, read any source documents.  Review is not directed at finding 
defects in source documents, but any found are a bonus.  They will be 
improvement suggestions (see .class.imp).  Do not waste too much time finding 
defects in source documents.

.rule: Ensure that you are familiar with all rule sets or check lists.

.role: Ensure that you know and keep in mind the roles you have been assigned.

.product: Read through the product document (or documents) in the order 
specified.  Remember to read the product documents in reverse order if you have 
been assigned a backwards checking role (see role.check.backwards).

.major: Concentrate on finding major issues (see guide.review.class.major); 
this is of primary importance.

.max: Find as many issues as possible to help the author.

.note: Note all issues; you need not log them later.

.rough: Your log can be rough; concentrate on finding issues.

.trouble: Consult the leader if you have any questions, or if you are finding 
too many or too few issues.

.class: Classify each defect you find according to guide.review.class.


End

.record: At the end of checking, record (for each product document):
  - How many defects were found, by class (see .class);
  - How long was actually spent;
  - How much of the product document was actually checked;
  - Any problems encountered.


