                 PROCEDURE FOR A REVIEW KICKOFF MEETING
                             proc.review.ko
                               draft proc
                           gavinm 1997-06-12


INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document describes the procedure for the kickoff meeting as part 
of a formal review.

.purpose: When holding a review, it is normal to execute this procedure with 
all checkers before checking.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone acting as a review leader.


PROCEDURE


In Advance

.doc.prep: In advance of the meeting, the leader ensures that checkers have 
access to the necessary documents, either by supplying them with physical 
copies, or by advising them of the documents in advance.

.train.prep: If any checkers are not familiar with formal review, the leader 
should ensure that they are briefed, and supplied with the relevant process 
documents.


At The Meeting

.record: Times, objectives, and anything else appropriate should all be 
recorded in the review record.

.doc.check: In the meeting, the leader checks that all checkers have access to 
all necessary documents.

.intro: The leader may ask the author to prepare a short (one minute) 
introduction to the product document.

.role: The leader announces or negotiates any roles he wishes to assign, and 
ensures that checkers understand their assignments.

.improve: The leader announces any relevant metrics and negotiates objectives.

.log: The leader announces the time of the logging meeting.  This should 
normally be set at the estimate end of the kickoff meeting, plus the estimated 
checking time, plus a short tea-break.  It should not normally be delayed to 
another day.

.remind: The leader reminds checkers of the immediate objective of review (see 
process.review.goal.fix).

.author: The leader reminds the author that he can withdraw the document from 
review at any time.

.train.check: The leader checks that checkers are familiar with their tasks and 
solicits any questions or suggestions.


