                GUIDE FOR REVIEWING PAPERS, BOOKS, ETC.
                               guide.bib
                              draft guide
                           richard 1995-08-03

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document is to guide the reviewing of academic papers, books, and 
other external publications for the Memory Management Project.  The guide 
exists to help the process of review be both effective and useful to the 
project.

.readership: This document is intended for any member of the MM Group.


PURPOSE

.purp: We review external publications in order to determine whether they 
contain information which is important to the project.  Information is 
important if it could affect how well the project achieves its goals (and meets 
requirements), for better or worse.  Looking at academic papers is also 
intellectually stimulating and should be fun.


EFFORT

.effort: An initial review of an external publication can be fairly cursory.  
You may spend as little as an hour or two reading and thinking about a paper.  
If it turns out to be important then we will give it more attention later.  
Just read it through, keeping in mind the goals, requirements, and design of 
the project.  A book will take longer.


SOURCE DOCUMENTS

.source: Source documents for reviewing external publication are:
 - the publication itself,
 - the goals and requirements of the project.


PRODUCT DOCUMENTS

.type: The product document of a review is an entry of type "bib" (Bibliography 
Entry) in the Information System.


COMPOSING THE BIBLIOGRAPHY ENTRY

.tag: Choose a tag for the bib based of the form 
"<format>.<author><year>[<serial>]" where <format> is something like "paper" or 
"book", <author> is the truncated surname of the author, or the initial letters 
of the surnames of the authors if there is more than one, and <year> is the 
(last two-digits of the) year of publication [we ought to use 4 digit years to 
avoid y2k problems.  drj 1998-12-11].  In the case where the author published 
several documents in one year, then add the optional serial "a", "b", etc.  
E.g. Diwan, Tarditi, and Moss wrote two papers in 1993, paper.dtm93, and 
paper.dtm93a.

.title: The title of the bib can be the title of the publication, but if that 
is long or uninformative, provide one which is more useful for your 
colleagues.  The creator and creation time fields should be your name and the 
time at which you create the bib, and not the author and date of the 
publication you're reviewing.

.fields: In addition to the standard fields for a "doc", the bib form contains:

  Title: The full title of the publication.  (The Notes implementation of the 
bib
         form will copy this from the title of the thing if you omit it.)

  Authors: The names of the authors of the publication.

  Publisher: The organization which published the document.  Typically this will
             be a University or department.

  Pub. Date: The date on the publication, if it has one.

  Ident: Some documents have an additional identification code, such as a 
technical
         report number or an ISBN.  This might be useful in locating the paper 
in future, so
         include it if possible.

  URL: If the publication is available on the Internet, include a URL for 
finding it.

  Abstract: Enter the abstract of the publication verbatim.

  Review: Enter your review here.

The Notes implementation of the form also contains a field called "Document".  
If you have the PostScript source of the publication, attach it here using the 
Attach command from the File menu.  If you can, add a PDF (Adobe Acrobat) 
version, or other format that can be browsed on-line.


WRITING THE REVIEW

.review: Some things to consider when writing the review are quality, 
relevance, importance, and urgency.

Quality is how good you think the material in the publication is, along with a 
justification.  Does it have merit, or are its conclusions bogus?  Why?  This 
is where you can put your overall opinions or impressions.

Relevance is an indication of how close the material in the publication is to 
the project.  Consider whether it contains information which we should be 
using, and why these would help the project to better meet its requirements.  
Provide an analysis in these terms if possible.

Importance is a measure of how much this publication could affect the project.  
If it is of no consequence, then it is not important.  If the publication could 
significantly affect the project, for better or worse, then it is important.

Urgency indicates how soon we should consider the publication more closely.  If 
it contains important information which is of significant risk to the project 
then we need to examine it more closely with some urgency.  If it will only 
affect things further down the line, then it is important but not urgent.  If 
the publication doesn't require further examination, it has zero urgency.

[consider mailing review to mm-discussion / languages-discussion for general 
perusal?  drj 1998-12-11]


FOLLOW-UP

.follow-up: If a publication is important, urgent, or both, make sure the 
Project manager knows about it.

