            SUMMARY OF MEETING WITH ROD BURSTALL, 1995-11-20
                        meeting.lfcs.1995-11-20
                               draft doc
                           richard 1995-11-20

INTRODUCTION

Rod Burstall met with Richard Brooksby on 1995-11-20 to "catch up", discuss 
directions for MM/LFCS collaboration, and arrange a wider meeting later in the 
year.


SUMMARY


Tomas Schreiber

Rod might like to get Thomas Schreiber involved in the collaborative work.


Funding

Richard offered to help with putting together funding proposals, but Rod said 
that this wasn't needed at present and that the main thing would be to publish.


Project Ideas

Richard talked about ideas for:

  1. modelling MM in ML (design method, theories)

  2. verifiable subsets of C and ML and other.

  3. verifying the ML model

  4. process of development via ML

  5. find applications for modelling

  6. find applications for theorem proving

Rod agreed that this was interesting, and thought that the main interest of 
LFCS lies with 1, 3, and 6.  Richard thought that Harlequin's main interest is 
in 1, 2, 4, and 5.  [It is clear that we can collaborate on 1!]


Intelligent Systems Team Research

Richard told Rod about the Intelligent Systems Team at Harlequin, two members 
of which are working with the Memory Management Group on a couple of projects:

  1. verifying that multiple policies are a good idea, and developing methods
     for selecting policies;

  2. verifying that more dimensions than age can be fed into a generational
     model, and methods for control over policy based on measurement in these
     dimensions.

To do this work, the IS Team will be developing quantitative models of memory 
management policies.  At a recent meeting in Boston, Richard suggested to them 
that they use ML for the model, and that perhaps the model could be shared with 
the MM/LFCS collaboration.  Richard suggested a meeting between Satinder Baveja 
<satinder@harlequin.com>, David Cohn <cohn@harlequin.com>, and the MM/LFCS 
collaborators in order to exchange ideas and investigate sharing.  This meeting 
would probably take place in February in the UK.


CMU's Modelling Efforts

Rod pointed out that CMU have been working on modelling using CAML, and that 
this should be investigated.


Next Meeting

The next meeting should involve at least Rod, Richard, Paul Jackson, and Healf 
Goguen.  We came up with Tuesday December 5th or Thursday December 7th at the 
Harlequin offices in Longstanton, near Cambridge.  Alternatively, sometime the 
following week.

