                NOTES FROM MM/PRODUCT MEETING 1997-10-22
                       meeting.product.1997-10-22
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-10-22

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Nick Levine and Gavin Matthews met to determine a plan for 
release.product.plough, with some input from David Jones and Richard Brooksby.

.source: Source documents included req.product and version.product.plough.


REQUIREMENTS

.req.version: It is recognized that our system of dealing with requirements 
interacts poorly with version.  We don't know what categories requirements have 
in particular versions.  For plough, all requirements are nice in that we are 
doing all of them that involve no work.

.req.mkt: The marketing requirements (req.product.fun.mkt.* and 
req.product.attr.mkt.*) are not very relevant to this version.

.req.ansi: req.product.dc.env.ansi-c is poorly specified.  There are a number 
of different requirements here of varying category.  They should be thrashed 
out in e-mail.  Nick will start this off (see .act.ansi).


PLAN


To Do

.plan: The following tasks are requiring to be done before we can release 
verison.product.plough (not in order, there are dependencies):

.plan.version: Update version.plough for pool classes and varieties 
(variety.ci, variety.hi, variety.ce, and variety.he).  

.plan.class: Determine the appropriate list of pool classes (maybe AMC, AMS, 
AWL, EPDL, EPVM, LO, and MV).

.plan.doc: Assemble the reference manual, probably best done by Leah.

.plan.readme: Write the readme file.

.plan.install: Write the installation guide.

.plan.manifest: Write the manifest.

.plan.platform: Determine the set of platforms, including Windows.

.plan.dist: Design a cheap and appropriate means of distribution of this 
version.

.plan.build: Generate the mps files for the release.  Probably best done by 
David Jones.


Other Planning Issues

.plan.ref: It isn't necessary to include the MM Reference in this version.

.plan.date: We should be able to release release.product.plough by 1997-11-12 
Wednesday.


ACTIONS

.act.darwin: GavinM will write up this plan in Darwin using new or existing 
requests.

.act.ansi: Nick will initiate discussion of the ANSI-C conformance issues.

