                          THE ANSI C RATIONALE
                          ANSI X3J11 Committee
                               ANSI ??, 
               http://www.lysator.liu.se/c/rat/title.html

                              paper.ansi88
                               incomplete
                            nickb 1996-11-19


ABSTRACT:

[actually from the Introduction]:

This Rationale summarizes the deliberations of X3J11, the Technical 
Committee charged by ANSI with devising a standard for the C programming 
language.  It has been published along with the draft Standard to assist 
the process of formal public review.  

[...]

This Rationale focuses primarily on additions, clarifications, and 
changes made to the language as described in the Base Documents (see 
§1.5).  It is not a rationale for the C language as a whole: the 
Committee was charged with codifying an existing language, not designing 
a new one.  No attempt is made in this Rationale to defend the 
pre-existing syntax of the language, such as the syntax of declarations 
or the binding of operators.  

[...]

The Rationale discusses some language or library features which were not
 adopted into the Standard.  These are usually features which are 
popular in some C implementations, so that a user of those 
implementations might question why they do not appear in the Standard.  

This Rationale is organized to parallel the Standard as closely as 
possible, to facilitate finding relevant discussions.  Some subsections 
of the Rationale comprise just the subsection title from the Standard: 
this indicates that the Committee thought no special comment was 
necessary. Where a given discussion touches on several areas, attempts 
have been made to include cross-references within the text.  Such 
references, unless they specify the Standard or the Rationale, are 
deliberately ambiguous.

REVIEWS:

This document was published by ANSI alongside the standard (standard.ansic). 
ISO did not carry it over to ISO C. It carries some authority in settling 
interpretation disputes (possibly the third highest authority, after the 
standard itself and the various associated matters (footnotes, examples, 
annexes).

ATTACHMENT
   "rationale.ps"

