         PORTABLE DOCUMENT FORMAT REFERENCE MANUAL VERSION 1.2
  Adobe Systems Incorporated (Tim Bienz;Richard Cohn;James R. Meehan)
                  Adobe Systems Incorporated, 12/11/96
                             0-201-62628-4
  http://www.adobe.com/supportservice/devrelations/PDFS/TN/PDFSPEC.PDF

                               book.bcm96
                                 draft
                            nickb 1997-01-27


ABSTRACT:

[from the introduction:]

This book describes the Portable Document Format (PDF), the native file format 
of
the Adobe ® Acrobat ® family of products. The goal of these products is to 
enable
users to easily and reliably exchange and view electronic documents independent
of the environment in which they were created. PDF relies on the imaging model
of the PostScript ® language to describe text and graphics in a device- and
resolution-independent manner. To improve performance for interactive viewing,
PDF defines a more structured format than that used by most PostScript language
programs. PDF also includes objects, such as annotations and hypertext links, 
that
are not part of the page itself but are useful for interactive viewing.

PDF files are built from a sequence of numbered objects similar to those used in
the PostScript language. The text, graphics, and images that make up the 
contents
of a page are represented using operators that are based on those in the 
PostScript
language and that closely follow the Adobe Illustrator ® 3.0 page description
operators.

A PDF file is not a PostScript language program and cannot be directly 
interpreted
by a PostScript interpreter. However, the page descriptions in a PDF file can be
converted into a PostScript language program.

About this book

This book provides a description of the PDF file format, as well as suggestions 
for
producing efficient PDF files. It is intended primarily for application 
developers
who wish to produce PDF files directly. This book also contains enough
information to allow developers to write applications that read and modify PDF
files. While PDF is independent of any particular application, occasionally PDF
features are best explained by the actions a particular application takes when 
it
encounters that feature in a file. Similarly, Appendix D discusses some
implementation limits in the Acrobat viewer applications, even though these 
limits
are not part of the file format itself.

This book consists of two sections. The first section describes the file format 
and
the second lists techniques for producing efficient PDF files. In addition,
appendices provide example files, detailed descriptions of several predefined 
font
encodings, and a summary of PDF page marking operators.


ATTACHMENT
   "pdfspec.pdf"

