                      COMBINING BRANCH PREDICTORS
                            Scott McFarling
                           DEC WRL, 01/06/93
                             DEC WRL TN-36
  http://www.research.digital.com/wrl/techreports/abstracts/TN-36.html

                          paper.mcfarling1993
                                 draft
                             drj 1997-12-17


ABSTRACT:

One of the key factors determining computer performance is the degree to which 
the implementation can take
advantage of instruction-level parallelism. Perhaps the most critical limit to 
this parallelism is the presence of
conditional branches that determine which instructions need to be executed 
next. To increase parallelism,
several authors have suggested ways of predicting the direction of conditional 
branches with hardware that
uses the history of previous branches. The different proposed predictors take 
advantage of different observed
patterns in branch behavior. This paper presents a method of combining the 
advantages of these different
types of predictors. The new method uses a history mechanism to keep track of 
which predictor is most
accurate for each branch so that the most accurate predictor can be used. In 
addition, this paper describes a
method of increasing the usefulness of branch history by hashing it together 
with the branch address.
Together, these new techniques are shown to outperform previously known 
approaches both in terms of
maximum prediction accuracy and the prediction accuracy for a given predictor 
size. Specifically, prediction
accuracy reaches 98.1% correct versus 97.1% correct for the most accurate 
previously known approach.
Also, this new approach is typically at least a factor of two smaller than 
other schemes for a given prediction
accuracy. Finally, this new approach allows predictors with a single level of 
history array access to outperform
schemes with multiple levels of history for all but the largest predictor 
sizes. 


ATTACHMENT
   "WRL-TN-36.ps"

