                 GARBAGE COLLECTION AND LOCAL VARIABLE
         TYPE-PRECISION AND LIVENESS IN JAVA VIRTUAL MACHINES 
                 Ole Agesen;David Detlefs;J. Eliot Moss
                             ACM, 01/05/98
             Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN '98 conference
    on Programming language design and implementation, pages 269-279
http://www.acm.org/pubs/articles/proceedings/pldi/277650/p269-agesen/p269-agesen.pdf
      http://www.sunlabs.com/research/java-topics/pubs/98-pldi.ps

                              paper.adm98
                               incomplete
                            tony 1999-04-19


ABSTRACT:

Full precision in garbage collection implies retaining only those heap 
allocated objects that will actually be used in the future.  Since full 
precision is not computable in general, garbage collectors use safe (i.e., 
conservative) approximations such as reachability from a set of root 
references.  Ambiguous roots collectors (commonly called "conservative") can be 
overly conservative because they overestimate the root set, and thereby retain 
unexpectedly large amounts of garbage.  We consider two more precise collection 
schemes for Java virtual machines (JVMs).  One uses a type analysis to obtain a 
type-precise root set (only those variables that contain references); the other 
adds a live variable analysis to reduce the root set to only the live reference 
variables.  Even with the Java
programming language’s strong typing, it turns out that the JVM specification 
has a feature that makes type-precise root sets difficult to compute.  We 
explain the problem and ways in which it can be solved.

Our experimental results include measurements of the costs of the type and 
liveness analyses at load time, of the incremental benefits at run time of the 
liveness analysis over the type-analysis alone, and of various map sixes and 
counts.  We find that the liveness analysis often produces little or no 
improvement in heap size, sometimes modest improvements, and occasionally the 
improvement is dramatic.  While further study is in order, we conclude that the 
main benefit of the liveness analysis is preventing bad surprises.

ATTACHMENTS
   "98-pldi.ps"
   "p269-agesen.pdf"

