                     MM/EP-CORE MEETING 1999-07-15
                       meeting.epcore.1999-07-15
                               draft doc
                            pekka 1999-07-15

.intro: Pekka P. Pirinen <pekka> and Tony Mann <tony> met with Dave T. Berry 
<dtb> and Mike Williams <mikew> (by phone) to discuss the plans for MM/EP-Core.

.sw.releases: Dave described the current plans for SW releases: SW 5.1r1 to go 
to prerelease soon and final on Aug 23.  SW 5.2, a new release from the trunk, 
to be demoed in October (perhaps even September), and released around the end 
of the year.  Beyond that there'll be a SW 5.5/6.0 for DRUPA next year, but not 
much has been decided about that.

.sw.platforms: MAC OS X is the most urgent new platform, both Server and 
Workstation.  Windows 2000 will be hot as well.  SW is being ported to Solaris 
7; this will probably have no MM implications, but needs to be tested by MM.  
Some customers are using IRIX 6.5, and LDR reported a strange MM problem; Dave 
will inform MM if it can be reproduced.  The enthusiasm for Linux has died down 
and the VxWorks deal hasn't been concluded, so those are not needed ATM.  There 
are no IRIX 5 customers for SW 5.1, so it's not supported anymore.

.mac.x: There are technical questions about how to support MAC OS X and System 
8.  We decided to discuss these in mail, including Luke Tunmer <luke> and Mike 
Richmond <miker>.  .mac.x.vm: The basic tradeoff seems to be that the Carbon 
i/f won't support a VM arena, so either no VM arena or two separate builds.  
Dave will ask Commercial for guidelines on whether and how we want to support 
System 8 customers, particularly before 8.3.

.mm.plan: Tony described the tentative MM plan that showed the next release 
(called chub) given to QA Nov 4, and to EP-Core Nov 18.  This assumes that work 
will proceed along lines discussed in earlier meetings and that a replacement 
for David is found relatively soon.  The most notable improvement would be to 
segment placement and MAC OS X support.  .mm.plan.no: It was agreed that an 
earlier release is needed for segment placement.

.priorities: Segment placement is the most important thing and should be made 
available in an early (pre)release, so that EP-Core can experiment with it and 
change their code for the new APIs.  It was recognized that it is an important 
requirement that such releases can duplicate the old behaviour, so that the new 
behaviours are not forced on the client.  MAC OS X is also important for chub.

.logs: Pekka described the allocation replayer tool and promised to send 
EP-Core information about producing MPS telemetry logs, so that this can be 
used to analyse future problems.  [Actually, this will be more useful in chub, 
as the logs will contain more information; in particular, the replayer will not 
work with brisling logs.]

.smp: Pekka reported that the requested VM arena capability for SMP RIPs 
doesn't seem to be technically feasible.  Basically, the shared memory 
interfaces in Windows and UNIX are designed for sharing a few large areas for 
long periods, not mapping and unmapping lots of small pieces, and the 
synchronization and OS overhead costs for getting around that would likely be 
prohibitive [see request.epcore.160047: VM Arenas don't work with 
multi-processing for details].

