             MEMORY MANAGEMENT PROJECT SUMMARY, 1995-08-02
                       report.summary.1995-08-02
                               draft doc
                           richard 1995-08-02

INTRODUCTION

This document was produced for the SP/APPS Divisional Management Committee by 
Richard Brooksby, acting on the following request:

> Date: Thu, 20 Jul 1995 17:12:55 -0400
> To: spman, norvig, gjp, kevinm
> From: spapdm
> Subject: Project Reviews
> 
> Please send the division management team a summary of all projects
> underway in your group.  The summary should be sent via email to
> "spapdm".  The summary should include:
> 
> Goals: What the project trying to accomplish. This section should
> not exceed two paragraphs.
> 
> Staffing: Who is working on the project, and a brief (one sentence)
> description of their role.
> 
> Schedule: What are the project's major milestones, and when are they
> expected to be completed.  How confident are you (0% to 100%) that the
> schedule can be met under the current circumstances.  If you have more
> than eight major milestones, then please condense some of them.
> 
> Risks: What are some of the greatest potential problems in achieving
> the goals and schedules? What provisions have you made for dealing
> with these potential problems? This section should not be longer than
> a paragraph.
> 
> Connections: are there other projects on which you are depending for
> some deliverable?  Are there other projects that are depending on your
> deliverables?  If so, what?


GOALS

General Goals (agreed with Jerri)

internal        Make products for other groups within Harlequin
central         Reduce duplicated effort within Harlequin
revenue         Make products for sale by Harlequin
quality         Improve quality of solutions within Harlequin
image           Broaden and improve the image of Harlequin

Goals of DylanWorks Relationship (draft, for review by Andy Sizer)

soft            Provide memory management solution for DylanWorks
promote         Promote the adoption of Dylan by application programmers
improve         Improve the general MM system for other clients

Goals of EP Relationship (draft, for review by Yoryos)

protect         Protect ScriptWorks from future failure due to the
                increasing reliance of PostScript jobs on garbage
                collection.  (GC is a requirement of PS level 2.)
downsize        Enable "moving EP market down".  Reduce size of machine
                needed to run ScriptWorks.  (Yoryos mentioned print-
                servers, embedded controllers.)
compete         Remove the risk of bad publicity due to lack of GC.
maintain        Reduce the mainentance burden on EP.
perform         Increase the performance of ScriptWorks.
relate          Improve relationship between SP and EP.
improve         Improve the general MM system for other clients.


STAFFING

resource.person.richard: Richard Brooksby <richard> -- manager, administrator, 
analyst, software engineer, designer, developer.

resource.person.ptw: Tucker Withington <ptw> -- designer, developer, Dylan 
language liaison, 1CC agent, source of knowledge.

resource.person.drj: David Jones <drj> -- developer, test engineer.

resource.person.dsm: David Moore <dsm> -- developer.  (New recruit.)


SCHEDULE / DELIVERY OBJECTIVES

DylanWorks

These objectives are subject to review when we have a review of the 
requirements of the Dylan Project.  It seems that they are likely to change, 
because some Dylan requirements, particularly from the environment group, were 
previously hidden.  There may be extra releases to support persistence, weak 
references and finalization, etc.  This is why the confidence factors are low 
after the imminent debugging release.

Tag                     Title                             Due           Conf.
obj.dylan.soft.debug    DylanWorks Debugging Release      1995-08-11    80%
obj.dylan.soft.incr     DylanWorks Incremental Release    1995-10-09    40%
obj.dylan.soft.gen      DylanWorks Generational Release   1995-10-30    20%
obj.dylan.soft.full     DylanWorks Full Release           1995-11-30    10%

ScriptWorks

We are still in the early stages of analysis for the ScriptWorks deliverables, 
so this delivery plan is extremely volatile.

Tag                     Title                             Due           Conf.
obj.sw.soft.eval        ScriptWorks Evaluation Release    1996-03-01     5%
obj.sw.soft.full        ScriptWorks Full Release          1996-12-01     1%


RISKS

Change in Dylan Project requirements

The recent management changes in the Dylan Project, combined with surprise 
requests for new functionality make this seem very likely.  I have raised the 
alarm with the Dylan Group management, and we will review the requirements when 
things have settled down.  Meanwhile we are pressing ahead with work towards 
obj.dylan.soft.incr, since this is definitely required and is the most risky 
piece of work.

Change in DylanWorks delivery schedule

I am persuing a strategy of "evolutionary delivery" (otherwise known as 
"late-binding project management"(TM)) which attempts to ensure that the Dylan 
Group have something which works at all stages, even if it doesn't satisfy all 
the requirements, especially in performance.

Shafted by Microsoft Windows

We live in constant fear of finding something dreadful that doesn't work in 
Windows NT or Windows 95 that will make our designs impossible.  We have 
attempted to test the functionality with various test programs and benchmarks, 
but I just don't trust Microsoft an inch.  Whenever I've tried to talk to their 
support people I've been run in (large) circles by incompetent idiots who think 
they know what I want.  Their documentation is approximately 40% ambiguous.

Large workload developing for ScriptWorks

The relationship with EP for ScriptWorks memory management is new.  Who knows 
how it will turn out?  I am actively working on defining this relationship and 
working out the requirements so that we know where we stand.  Then I will be 
able to say something about the future in this area.  At the moment it's hazy, 
and that means it's risky.  Nick Barnes has expressed an interest in moving 
from the ML Group to the MM Project, and I believe he would be idea for 
analysis and technical leadership on the EP side of things.

Lack of delegation prevents expansion of project

With three staff it became very apparent that I wasn't sharing enough 
information to allow really effective autonomous working.  This has been 
particularly bad for Tucker, who can't get information easily.  I have recently 
been spending a lot of time writing documentation outlines, partly to locate 
the areas which need expansion, and partly to prepare for the arrival of Bob 
Matthews, who may be working on MM internal documentation (I haven't had any 
statement of commitment).  I have also developed a project ontology in Spring 
which we will develop to automate processes and provide a repository for all 
project entities such as design and quality documents.  (Take a look on 
notescam or notesmas in PROJECTS/MEMMAN/MMINFO2.NSF.)

Lack of management experience or training

I have virtually no management experience or training, and although my results 
have so far been good, I am not confident that am doing all the right things to 
make the deliverables come together.  I am attacking this risk by studying the 
subject of management and putting some of the better ideas into practice in the 
project.  I would also welcome more sharing of advice and experience with other 
managers.


CONNECTIONS

We depend on: TS/Systems, and general admin.

We are critical to the success of the Dylan Project, since DylanWorks requires 
our memory manager, and it has to be a good one to prevent bad publicity due to 
garbage collection.

We are not yet depended upon by EP, but Yoryos sees us as important 
strategically.

