                       RELEASE NAMING CONVENTIONS
                           guide.release.name
                             incomplete doc
                           richard 1997-02-28

INTRODUCTION

.intro: This document describes release naming conventions for the Memory 
Management Group.  This information can be used to understand the release 
schedule, and to decide on names for new releases.  It also describes what 
kinds of releases there are.

.hist.0: Drafted by Richard Brooksby <richard> and Richard Tucker <rit> on 
1997-02-28 based on mail.richard.1997-01-20.13-46 and meeting.qa.1997-02-27, 
and meeting.product.1997-01-08.


DEFINITIONS

.def.rel: A "release" is:

  .def.rel.act: the act of transferring some object (e.g. delivering the 
software from development to QA),

  .def.rel.rec: the record of this act (e.g. the DARWIN release document),

  .def.rel.obj: the object that was transferred.



RELEASE PROCESS


Development

Development (including documentation, etc.) make changes to the product in 
order to make it meet the specification for the customer release.  Development 
may use "milestone releases" to manage the change.  Eventually development 
produce a final milestone release which is ready for QA (see below).  A QA 
release is created as a child of this release, with no changes between the two 
(i.e. the released object is identical).


Quality Assessment

The product is passed from development to QA, who assess whether the product 
meets the specification.  QA use "QA releases" to manage the changes resulting 
from defects found in the product.  Defects are reported and fixed by 
development in subsequent QA releases, until an acceptable product is 
generated.  At this point, a candidate release is created as a child of the 
last QA release with no changes between the two (i.e. the released object is 
identical).


Manufacture

[The product is passed from QA to manufacturing.]


Shipping

[The product is passed from manufacturing to the customer.]



KINDS OF RELEASES

.kind: The four kinds of release are:


Milestone Releases

.kind.m: A milestone release captures the fact that some group of changes to 
the product have occurred (and could possibly be assessed by QA).  They may be 
used internally during development without progressing to an external release, 
but may also be the final development step before a QA release.


QA Releases

.kind.qa: A QA release indicates that the product has been transferred from 
development to QA for quality assessment.  The intention is that the product 
meets the specification for that release.  QA then check that this is so.


Candidate Releases

.kind.c: Candidate:


Customer Releases

.kind.cust: 


