          PREDICTING LIFETIMES IN DYNAMICALLY ALLOCATED MEMORY
                      David A. Cohn;Satinder Singh
                          MIT Press, 01/01/97
           Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
              http://webhost.harlequin.com/~cohn/memory.ps

                               paper.cs97
                               incomplete
                            pekka 1998-03-02


ABSTRACT:

Predictions of lifetimes of dynamically allocated object can be used to improve 
time and space efficiency of dynamic memory management in computer programs.  
Barrett and Zorn used a simple lifetime predictor and demonstrated this 
improvement on a variety of computer programs.  In this paper, we use decision 
trees to do lifetime prediction on the same programs and show significantly 
better prediction.  Our method also has the advantage that during training we 
can use a large number of features and let the decision tree automatically 
choose the relevant subset.

REVIEWS:

The method seems valuable, and is clearly presented.

Even though the performance improvements are small, the authors have verified 
that they are statistically significant -- something that is often missing when 
people present their benchmarks.  However, the training sets are small, only 
one or two (admittedly large) inputs, which tends to decrease the value of the 
benchmarks.  Actually, it is remarkable that any performance improvement was 
achieved since the benchmarks were apparently done on a SparcStation, and the 
register window architecture means that the data on the stack is typically at 
least 7 function calls old, and often much older than that.  As the authors 
remark, it would be interesting to study exactly what the "relevant  features" 
that the prediction used were.  The tests should also be repeated on more 
traditional architectures and with different depths of stack inspection.

The allocation strategy is very sensitive to false positives in short-lived 
prediction -- this, together with the small training set, might explain the 
negative results on cfrac.

  -- pekka 1998-03-02



