            SUMMARY OF MM/DOCUMENTATION MEETING, 1995-09-19
                         meeting.doc.1995-09-19
                               draft doc
                           richard 1995-09-19

INTRODUCTION

Richard met Bob Matthews to discuss initial priorities and directions for MM 
documentation, and start the documentation process.


PRIORITIES

Richard identified the following priorities, using his own opinion and input 
from various members of the team:

  1. Procedure
     a. implementation guidelines
     b. build system documentation
     c. test procedure / test plans
     d. policies

  2. Model
     a. overview
     b. key ideas
     c. refine to design outlines

  3. "User Manual" / Dylan API documentation

  4. Requirements documents, starting with EP requirements

  5. Glossary

  6. Policies


POLICIES (which came up during the meeting)

  - Conservatism
    - for portability
    - to avoid software rot due to dependencies on systems

  - Ontology / tagging

  - Controlled dependencies

  - Thread independence

  - Component software


GLOSSARY ITEMS (which came up during the meeting)

MPS (Memory Pool System): the memory management software subsystem being 
developed by the Memory Management group in order to provide memory management 
for DylanWorks, the EP Core RIP, and hopefully other internal and external 
products.

MPM (Memory Pool Manager): the "kernel" of the MPS, providing the "generic 
interface" (qv) and supporting the "pool classes" (qv).

pool: a set of objects or logical area of memory managed by a common management 
"policy", implemented by a "pool class".

pool class: an implementation of a memory management policy.


MODEL

Richard briefly explained the system architecture, the multiple pool/one 
interface model, and some of the internals of the MPS and then the MPM, in 
order to give Bob enough background to interpret the information in the 
Information System.


ACTIONS

Richard will go back over mail and recover his headings from the previous 
presentation of the MPS design.  From this he will produce a breadth-first 
traversal, exploding this into some notes which Bob can use as source material.

Bob will spend some time during the next week doing background research -- 
looking through mailing list archives and the InfoSys and gathering information.

Richard and Bob will meet on Monday (1995-09-25) to go into more detail.

Richard will prepare some priorities for the procedural documentation.

Richard will arrange another big presentation of the MM project's work for the 
benefit of anyone who would like to attend.  This presentation should take 
place during Tucker's visit (i.e. after IWMM '95) and this time it will be 
recorded on video.

