                 NOTES FROM MM/BOOK MEETING, 1997-01-31
                        meeting.book.1997-01-31
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-01-31

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> met Andrew Shires <andrews> in order to 
introduce him to MM Group methods of defining project work.


NOTES

Richard: It's important to justify things in terms of goals.  This keeps work 
directed, and ensures that everyone is clear about what they're working 
towards.  If the goals are clear then everyone can apply themselves 
intelligently to achieving them.  The goals can also be approved by management, 
and then you can justify your work in terms of them.

For example, recently there's been some confusion about whether the book is 
intended to be about working with garbage collectors or with memory managers in 
general (see mail.nickb.????-??-??).  This is not a serious problem, but an 
example of one which would've been solved by earlier discussion of goals.

I think it's important that we work out the internal goals of the book, which 
include those in the prospectus, but also include things like supporting any MM 
product, supporting and forming part of product documentation, helping to sell 
the product and consulting services, etc.

[Richard introduces Andrew to the MM approach: goals, requirements, analysis, 
design, implementation, etc. and explains the ideas behind it.  He also talks 
about evolutionary delivery, change management, product evolution database.]


ACTIONS

.act.exp: Andrew will think about goals etc. and create some initial documents 
for discussion.

.act.darwin: Andrew will experiment with DARWIN using MM Product Evolution.  
Note that neither of us expect this to be seriously used for the Book project.  
The experiment is intended to help understand the process it embodies.

.act.scope: Richard and Andrew will continue to discuss the scope of the book 
(GC or MM) on the mm-book list so that all can participate.

.act.lmb: Make arrangements to meet with Leah when she visits from 1CC.  Andrew 
is on holiday from 1997-02-26 to 1997-03-13.

