            NOTES FROM MEETING WITH PETER GORDON, 1997-05-27
                        meeting.book.1997-05-27
                               draft doc
                       P T Withington 1997-05-29

On 27 May 1997 Ken Jackson, Sonya Keene, Andrew Shires and I met with Peter 
Gordon of Addison-Wesley to discuss our book proposal "Programming Effectively 
with Garbage Collection".

Executive summary:  

Peter felt the proposal was viable.  He would like to see a Preface, Table of 
Contents and sample chapter for external review by the end of June, to verify 
that.  He felt it was important for A-W to know Harlequin's plans for this 
book, in particular, would there be a product that the book would ship with?

Actions:

AndrewS:  Write preface and outline

ptw: Write sample chapter (i.e., one "recipe")

all: Suggest external reviewers, formulate questions to reviewers

mm-quartet: Reconsider being open with A-W regarding product plans.  (Note: 
Peter was _not_ open to signing a non-disclosure agreement.  If that were 
required, he would prefer ignorance.)

Details:

Peter opened the meeting with a discussion of the book title and its target 
audience.  He was keen to get the word Java into the title, concerned as to 
whether "Garbage Collection" would be understood by the target audience, and 
wondered whether the book should be targetted only to Java programmers, or as 
it is currently outlined, to a more general programming audience.

He suggested the title "(Automatic) Java Memory Management".  I pointed out 
that "automatic" was possibly redundant, and that "memory management" seems to 
have been co-opted by the DOS 640k problem.  I also explained that Java uses 
the term "garbage collection" and seems to be making it a generally acceptable 
term.

We discussed the target audience:  Targetting a single language would add 
appeal to the book for that language group, but it is unlikely that there is a 
market for separate versions of the book for different languages.  

Peter questioned the purpose of a CD in the book if everything on it was 
already available on the web.  (We couldn't tell him one purpose was to have a 
demo version of the product.) 

Peter was very interested to know what Harlequin's motivation for doing the 
book was, in particular, was a product planned that the book would be bundled 
with?  Because of the mm-quartet dictum, I was forced to answer that we were 
not allowed to discuss this.  I did point out that all our products use garbage 
collection, so the book could be targetted at all of our markets.  Ken pointed 
out that we have a web page on memory management and that we have a goal of 
establishing Harlequin as experts in that field.  Peter took the hint, but 
would like something more above board.

The conversation returned to the proper target marketplace.  Peter suggested 
the titles:

Effective Garbage Collection:  A Handbook for Java, and the Rest of Us Garbage 
Collection by Example

[Is "the rest of us" (tm) by Apple or Dummies?]  There was some additional 
discussion on the second title, pointing out that the target audience is the 
user of GC not the creator of GC.  Peter had some confusion over the programmer 
as user [we need a good metaphor here:  GC is tool to craftsman?]

There was some discussion as to whether the Java market consisted of mostly 
converted C/C++ programmers or graphics artists?  Who would be likely to 
benefit from the book most?  Java?  C++?  How many C++ programmers will 
actually use a garbage collector?

Peter asked what level of support the book has within Harlequin.  We told him 
ptw was 50%, AndrewS his own time, and that the book was an approved project.

Peter wanted to know what the schedule for the book was and we told him 1st 
quarter of calendar 98.

Peter wanted to know if we had considered what conference(s) would be good to 
introduce the book at.  We had not considered this.  He suggested Java One, 
which should recur in March, as a possible pre-publication introduction, with 
publication in July as a worst case.  Clearly we could make the '98 OOPSLA 
(October); we all expect Harlequin would have a Dylan booth there [wouldn't 
we?].  Peter suggested that _if_ Harlequin were to introduce a hypothetical 
product at Java One in March, we could hype the book and send people to the A-W 
booth...

Finally, Peter suggested some cover art:  Harlequino juggling "Java" cups.  I 
countered that Harlequino should be sorting his recyclables into bins.  (You 
need to see the cover art for the Web book:  Harlequino as magician, turning a 
blue kerchief into a purple one.  The title is "Framemaker to HTML".)



