                    L4: SOFTWARE QUALITY MANAGEMENT
                                kpa.sqm
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Software Quality 
Management, a key area of Level 4 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Software Quality Management is to develop a 
quantitative understanding of the quality of the project's software products 
and achieve specific quality goals.

Software Quality Management involves defining quality goals for the software 
products, establishing plans to achieve these goals, and monitoring and 
adjusting the software plans, software work products, activities, and quality 
goals to satisfy the needs and desires of the customer and end user for high 
quality products.

The practices of Software Quality Management build on the practices of the 
Integrated Software Management and Software Product Engineering key process 
areas, which establish and implement the project's defined software process, 
and the Quantitative Process Management key process area, which establishes a 
quantitative understanding of the ability of the project's defined software 
process to achieve the desired results.

Quantitative goals are established for the software products based on the needs 
of the organization, the customer, and the end users. So that these goals may 
be achieved, the organization establishes strategies and plans, and the project 
specifically adjusts its defined software process, to accomplish the quality 
goals.


GOALS

.goal.plan: The project's software quality management activities are planned.

.goal.goal: Measurable goals for software product quality and their priorities 
are defined.

.goal.progress: Actual progress toward achieving the quality goals for the 
software products is quantified and managed.

