               THE MEMORY FRAGMENTATION PROBLEM: SOLVED?
                    Mark S. Johnstone;Paul R. Wilson
                                01/10/97
            ftp://ftp.dcs.gla.ac.uk/pub/drastic/gc/wilson.ps

                               paper.jw97
                                 draft
                            pekka 1998-02-03


ABSTRACT:

  Memory allocation has been an active area of research.  A large number of 
algorithms have been proposed which were at least partly motivated by the 
belief that fragmentation can be a severe problem for some programs.  Other 
algorithms have been proposed with the emphasis on performance rather than 
fragmentation.  In this paper, we show that some well-known memory allocation 
algorithms, which can be implemented very efficiently, have essentially zero 
fragmentation for a wide variety of programs.

REVIEWS:

  There is the usual difficulty of deciding how to measure fragmentation.  The 
authors have thought about this, and the measures proposed are at least 
interesting and useful for a wide class of applications, but in the end, they 
cannot apply to every application.  As the paper says: "If fragmentation 
appears to be a problem for a program, it is important to identify the 
conditions under which it is a problem and measure the fragmentation for those 
conditions" (p.10).
  The test programs are an impressive bunch, and should be representative of 
most areas of technical computing.
  I'm not entirely convinced that the method used to eliminate overheads is 
correct.  There could be significant edge effects at the smallest sizes, where 
the hardware alignment, segregated fits, and in-band headers interact.  
However, most of these would reduce fragmentation, strengthening the claims of 
the paper.  More seriously, removing the effect of hardware alignment conflicts 
with the intent of the paper to measure real datasets; depending on the size 
distribution, this could affect the results either way.
  Even if the fragmentation measurements aren't entirely accurate, this paper 
is valuable for comparing different allocation policies.  It may be noted that 
segregated fits, best fit and even first fit all did very well.
  -- Pekka 1998-02-03

ATTACHMENT
   "wilson.ps"

