                         GUIDE FOR USING EMAIL
                              guide.email
                            incomplete guide
                             ptw 1998-08-17

INTRODUCTION

#scope: This document describes the MM Group conventions for using email.

#readership: This document is intended for anyone working within or with the MM 
Group.

#history.0: Draft created 1998-08-17 by P T Withington based on 
mail.ptw.1998-08-10.15-59(0), ff.


DEFINITIONS

#def.resend: Resend -- to send again.  The sender(s) of a piece of mail send 
the same
mail again, possibly with amendments.

#def.redirect: Redirect -- to direct again.  Mail directed to 'A' is 
re-directed to 'B', as if
'A' never recieved the mail in the first place.

#def.redistribute: Redistribute -- to distribute again.  Mail sent to a 
particular distribution
list is sent to additional recipients.

#def.forward: Forward -- to pass along.  A recipient of a piece of mail sends 
it on to another recipient.


EMAIL

#to:  Recipients who must read or respond to mail should appear on the To: line.

#cc:  Recipients who have an interest in the mail should appear on the cc: line.

#cc.mm:  MM should appear on the cc: line of mail that contains information 
that could be of interest to the group or should be archived.

#cc.mm.list:  Use a specific MM distribution list where applicable.  E.g., 
mm-dylan for topics relating to the Dylan group's use of the MM Group product.

#cc.mm.guideline:  Because MM is a distributed group, cc-ing MM is an important 
way of keeping the group informed of each others activities and it is a good 
way to ensure that any group member who can usefully contribute to a discussion 
has a chance to do so.  A good way to decide when _not_ to cc MM is:  If all of 
the group were in one room so you could avoid sending email by speaking 
directly to the addressees, would you feel you must leave the room so no 
bystanders can overhear your conversation?  If not, cc MM.

#inbox.prioritize:  Prioritize your mail according to whether you appear on the 
To: line (must read or respond), on the cc: line (is relevant to you) or only 
receive the mail because MM was cc-ed (is informational only).

#forward:  Most mailers support a forward operation.  It is preferable that you 
configure your mailer for RFC 934 forwarding.

#forward.usage:  Most mailer's forward operation passes a copy of the original 
mail as a new message from the forwarder.  Thus the ultimate recipient knows 
both the originator and the forwarder's identity.  The originator is not 
informed that the forwarding operation has take place.  Because of these 
features, the forward operation is of little use for group discussion.

#forward.fallback:  Because most mailer's have a forward operation, it may be 
used as a fallback when the more specific operations redirect, redistribute, 
and resend are not available.

#redirect:  Some mailer's support a redirect operation that will replace the 
current recipient with a new recipient and resend the message to the new 
recipient.  The ultimate recipient may or may not be informed that the redirect 
operation has taken place.  The originator may or may not be informed that the 
redirection has taken place.

#redirect.usage:  Redirect is for redirecting mail you receive to the correct 
recipient if you have received it in error, or are not the most appropriate 
recipient.  Do not use redirect for redistributing email to a wider list of 
recipients.

#redirect.comment:  If your mailer's redirect operation does not inform the 
originator of the redirection, you may want to do so, so that subsequent mail 
is directed correctly.

#redistribute:  Some mailer's support a redistribute operation that will add 
additional recipients and resend the message to the new recipients.  The new 
recipients may or may not be informed that the redistribution has taken place.  
The original recipients may or may not be informed that the redistribution has 
taken place.

#redistribute.usage:  For redistributing mail you receive to additional 
recipients, use your mailer's redistribute command (which should also inform 
the original recipients of the now wider distribution).

#redistribute.comment:  If your mailer does not annotate redistributed mail 
automatically, note the redistributed recipients as a comment in the body of 
the email and inform the original recipients of your redistribution.

#resend:  Some mailer's support a resend operation that will allow both the 
body and recipient list of a message to be edited and sent again.  The 
recipients of the original message and the resent message may or may not be 
informed that the message has been resent.  In some (few) mailers, a resent 
message will replace the original message.

#resend.caution:  In some mailers, anyone can resend a message even if they 
were not the original author:  if the resent message appears to come from the 
original author, rather than the resender, this operation is confusing at the 
least and unethical at the worst.  Such a use of the resend operation is highly 
discouraged.

#resend.usage:  If you are the original author of the email, use your mailer's 
resend command to amend a message.  Do not use a mailer's resend operation to 
redirect or redistribute mail if those operations are supported by the mailer.

#resend.comment:  When resending mail, note as a comment in the body of the 
email why the mail was resent.  If the body of the email has been amended, note 
each amendment with a comment.

#reply:  All mailers support a reply operation that will copy the subject of 
the mail, prepending "Re:", optionally quote the message being replied to, and 
attempt to sensibly construct a recipient list from the original message.

#reply.usage:  Use your mailers reply command when replying to mail.  Use 
quoting to give context to the reply.  Include all original recipients on the 
reply by default.

#reply.comment:  When replying to email, if you modifiy the recipient list, 
note your action as a comment in the body of the email.  E.g.:

[Just us] => private reply

[Removed xxx] => trimmed xxx from recipient list

[Addedd yyy] => added yyy to recipient list

If not obvious, also explain why the change in the recipient list was made.



