               DESIGN OF THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT WEB PAGES
                               design.web
                             incomplete doc
                           richard 1996-10-07

GOALS

.goals: The goals of the Memory Management Resource Pages are:

  .goal.improve: to improve the general image of Harlequin;

  .goal.expert: to promote Harlequin as a centre of expertise;

  .goal.sales: to promote sales of Harlequin products and services;

  .goal.state: to advance the state of the art in memory management while 
keeping Harlequin at the leading edge;

  .goal.practice: to promote good memory management and software engineering 
practice.


REQUIREMENTS


DESIGN


Structure

The information is arranged as a set of semi-independent "resources":

  - memory management news;
  - "The Harlequin Memory Management Glossary";
  - "The Harlequin Memory Management Bibliography";
  - frequently asked questions about memory management;
  - links to other on-line memory management resources.

In addition there is a page with instructions for contacting Harlequin on 
matters relating to the pages, or Harlequin in general.

The collection is known as the "The Memory Management Reference".

The pages are given a proper name so that people will refer to them using it.  
If they were given a generic name, such as "Memory Management Home Page" people 
wouldn't know which particular page was being referred to.  Similarly for "The 
Harlequin Memory Management Glossary".
mm

Page Design

Title: [Logo at each side.  Centred H1 text.  Why?]

Each page contains a "link bar" at the top (immediately below the title) and 
bottom (immediately above the footer).  The link bar is a centred one-line 
paragraph of links to the main sections:

     Contents | News | Glossary | Bibliography | FAQs | Links | Contacts

The text for the current page is not a link, and is displayed in bold, to make 
the current location clear when waving the mouse over the link bar.

[Why is the link bar designed like this?]

Footer: [Insert stuff about copyright notice etc. here.  Background.  
References to messages from legal, etc.] 

