                   DOCUMENTATION PLAN FOR MM PRODUCT
                        design.product.doc.arch
                              draft design
                             lmb 1997-02-26

INTRODUCTION

.intro: This document is an overview of the design of the documentation for the 
Memory Management product.

.structure:  This document discusses the following:

   1.  Documentation goals, requirements, and focus
   2.  Required components of the documentation set
   3.  Scope of the project
   4.  User analysis
   5.  Product profile
   6.  Schedule
   7.  Review requirements
   8.  Resources -- information, people, other
   9.  Production plan
 10.  Legal issues
 11.  Other issues
 12.  Risks and contingencies
 13. List of counter-requirements

.readership: People writing or reviewing MM Product documentation.  In 
addition, some internal customers have expressed interest in seeing the doc 
plan (from meeting.doc.1997-03-11.user-prof.ep.dtb.doc-plan).

.purpose: The purpose of this document is to define the MM Product 
documentation and map out a course of action to ensure that the goals of the 
documentation are met.

.sources: The content of this document was primarily derived from a meeting 
between Richard and Leah (meeting.doc.1997-01-16.docissues).  Other relevant 
documents are meeting.doc.* -- particularly meeting.doc.1996-06-04 -- 
analysis.product, and analysis.task.  [any others?  LMB]  The structure was 
derived in part from Chapters 1 through 6 of book.pk93.

.reviewers: This document should be reviewed by as many of the following people 
as possible:

   Management: Nick Levine (PM), Gavin Matthews (PjM), Chris Cox (PMM), Ken 
Jackson (DM), Mark Preece (QAM)

   Development: Nick Barnes, Richard Brooksby, David Jones, Pekka Pirinen, 
Tucker Withington

   Documentation: Andrew Shires

   Other: Richard Tucker (QA)

.approval: This document must be approved by the Quartet.

.status: This document is not yet complete.  Comments noting missing 
information are enclosed in square brackets.


DOCUMENTATION GOALS, REQUIREMENTS, AND FOCUS


Goals

See goals.product.doc.


Requirements

See req.product.doc.


Unique Selling Points

.usp: The following unique selling points (USPs) must be emphasized in the 
documentation (.req.product-success.focus and 
meeting.doc.1997-01-16.docissues.doc.points):

   .usp.needs: There is no one solution to memory management issues, so the MM 
Product has been designed to meet a number of different needs.

   .usp.choice: The developer has a choice of policy. There are different 
combinations of policies; some have GC, some do not.

   .usp.tool: The MM Product will offer more measurement and tuning tools than 
our competitors' products.

   .usp.roi: The MM Product will provide ROI at various levels.

   .usp.flexibility: The MM Product is flexible.

   .usp.reliability: The MM Product is reliable and solidly engineered.

   .usp.portability: The MM Product runs on many platforms.

   .usp.extensibility:  The number of pool classes in the MM Product can be 
increased between versions.


DOCUMENTS REQUIRED

.doc-set.minimum: The minimum documents required for the release are as follows 
(from meeting.doc.1996-06-04.set and meeting.doc.1997-01-16.docissues.docset):

   .doc-set.user-guide: User guide

This document will explain how to obtain ROI at various levels of time 
investment; how to use the MM Product, especially combinations of protocols; 
and how to deal with problems encountered while using the MM Product. The user 
guide is designed for users at all levels, although parts of it will be 
specific to particular levels.  (For a description of these levels, see 
meeting.doc.1996-06-04.level.) The documentation set should be designed so that 
this document is the first one that users turn to (from 
analysis.product.prod.sw.ref.jump).

The first or second chapter of the user guide may be a quick-start tutorial.  
We could ship this chapter as a booklet to be used with an evaluation version 
of the product (from meeting.doc.1996-06-04.set.quick, 
mail.gavinm.1997-04-14.13-27).

   .doc-set.user-guide.code: Example code will need to be developed to 
illustrate points in the user guide.  The guide should contain both shorter 
examples, to illustrate the simpler points, and longer, more developed 
examples, to illustrate more complex points and concepts.  [I thought this last 
sentence came from somewhere, but I can't find it in MM Information.  LMB]

   .doc-set.ref-man: General reference manual

This document will contain complete reference material for the MM Product's 
concepts, protocols, and symbols. It is intended for users at all levels.  It 
must be designed so that users who have not yet read the user manual are 
pointed back to the user manual (from analysis.product.prod.sw.ref.jump).

   .doc-set.tool-ref: Tool reference manual

This document will contain complete reference material for the MM Product's 
graphical tool. It is designed for users at all levels, as we hope they will be 
able to use the tool from the beginning (from 
meeting.doc.1997-01-16.docissues.guide.level.1). If it is small, this manual 
may become a section in the general reference manual; see .scope.tool-ref.

   .doc-set.cat: Pool class catalog

This document will contain complete descriptions of all pool classes, including 
tables of features by use level.  It is designed for users who have at least a 
small amount of experience with the MM Product -- that is, users at Level 2 and 
higher.

   .doc-set.ol-man: Online versions of the manuals

These documents will be HTML versions of the user guide, the reference 
manual(s), and the pool class catalog. They will be created from the source 
documents using WebMaker. [need to justify this. LMB]

   .doc-set.installation: Installation guide

This document will be based on Bob Mathews's "Questionnaire for release and 
installation notes" (see <URI:notes://Projects/Doc/Doc Group Information/Doc 
Group/Release and installation notes/Questionnaire for release and installation 
notes>).  It will detail the media and contents of the release, the hardware 
and software requirements, and how to extract and install the MM Product; it 
will also explain how to configure the environment and test the installation, 
if applicable, and how to address any licensing issues, if applicable.

   .doc-set.relnotes: Release notes

This document will be based on Bob Mathews's "Questionnaire for release and 
installation notes" (see <URI:notes://Projects/Doc/Doc Group Information/Doc 
Group/Release and installation notes/Questionnaire for release and installation 
notes>).  It will contain any last-minute information on the software and 
documentation, as well as any quality issues that the Quartet may specify for 
inclusion.  As this is a new product, no changes should need to be listed.  
Contact information for Harlequin support will be shown on the copyright pages 
and covers of the manuals, as per standard Doc Group practice.

   .doc-set.card:  A laminated quick reference card for the MPS interface (from 
mail.richard.1997-03-19.12-53)

We must also supply text and PostScript versions of the card, to make copying 
and updating easier (from 
mail.richard.1997-03-19.13-33.1).

.doc-set.extra: If time permits, the following documentation will also be 
included with the first release; otherwise, it will be included with later 
releases.

   .doc-set.pad:  A mouse pad with the MPS interface quick reference printed on 
it (from mail.richard.1997-03-19.12-53)

   .doc-set.ol-help: Online help

This document will provide help for the tool and pointers to the reference 
material in the online manuals.  The format of the online help needs to be 
discussed further, but we should consider implementing the online help in HTML 
using Microsoft's HTMLHelp, if feasible.  This has the advantages of using a 
single source for all platforms and allowing the online help developers to send 
real-time updates to the users.

If HTMLHelp tools are not available when online help development starts, the 
tools that are standard at that time will be used.  Note that this may push the 
schedule back somewhat or require additional writers, as the current writer is 
not familiar with Macintosh and UNIX help development.  See also 
.risk.online-help.

   .doc-set.mm-book: MM Book product (to be developed separately by Tucker 
Withington and Andrew Shires; for details, see project.book)


SCOPE OF THE PROJECT

.scope.summary: Summary: Complete documentation for a new product is required. 
The documentation set will probably be around 600 pages.

.scope.user-guide: The first part of the user guide will contain five chapters 
that illustrate how to use the product at various levels. These chapters will 
refer to chapters in the second part that explain how to use particular objects 
and protocols. It is difficult to estimate the size of the user guide at 
present, but 250 pages is a very rough guess.

.scope.ref-man: The MM Product contains about 10 concepts, about 20 protocols, 
and about 200 symbols. Assuming two symbols per page, the general reference 
manual will probably be around 250 pages.

.scope.tool-ref: It is difficult to estimate the size of the tool reference 
manual at present, but 50 pages is a very rough guess. If this manual is 
actually that small, it may be best to incorporate it into the general 
reference manual.  This would avoid production and marketing issues, such as 
having to manufacture a separate cover and having the manual get lost on the 
user's bookshelf.

.scope.cat: The pool catalog will contain descriptions of up to twelve pools 
(from meeting.doc.1996-06-04).  Again, it is difficult to estimate the size of 
the catalog, but 50 pages is a good rough guess.


USER ANALYSIS

[Check that the information in this section corresponds to 
meeting.doc.1997-03-11.user-prof.  LMB]

.analysis.user: This section defines the users of the MM Product's 
documentation.

.analysis.user.target: This product is primarily aimed at experienced software 
developers who may or may not be familiar with memory management concepts and 
techniques.  Some of the documentation is also aimed at other audiences, 
including development managers, OEMs, systems integrators, and testing 
engineers.  For a complete list and product needs analysis, see 
analysis.product.market.segs.  For a documentation needs analysis, see 
meeting.doc.1997-03-11.user-prof.

Background and Experience

.analysis.user.bkgrnd: 

.analysis.user.experience: 

.analysis.user.a-e-matrix: At some point, it might be beneficial for the 
marketing staff to create an audience/experience matrix.  [Need justification 
here.  LMB]

[Need to know the background and experience of the target users (not 
customers).  Also need information on: role of the product in their work; 
reactions to the product.  LMB]

Key Concepts

.analysis.user.key-concepts: 

[Need to know the key concepts that the user will be required to master in 
order to use the product most efficiently.  Also need information on: other 
things the users can accomplish using the product; how the product makes their 
work easier/better; how to use it with other products, such as Purify. LMB]

Tasks That the User Will Want to Perform

.analysis.user.task: For a detailed analysis of the tasks users will want to 
perform, see analysis.task.

Problem-Solving/Potential Problem Areas in Using the Product

[Need information on what sorts of problems the user might run into when using 
the product, and how to solve them; i.e., a trouble-shooting section.  In its 
final implementation, it could be either a separate section
in the manual or bits of trouble-shooting information scattered through the 
manual (in the appropriate places, of course).  LMB]


PRODUCT PROFILE

.analysis.product: For an overview of how the product will be used, see 
overview.mps.usage.  For a detailed marketing profile, see analysis.product.  
For a detailed description of the product, see design.product.arch and the 
functional specification.  [The functional spec doesn't exist yet, as far as I 
know.  LMB]


SCHEDULES

[Need justification from here on down.  LMB]

.schedule.summary: Summary: The documentation will be completed by [when? 
LMB].  See also .risk.*.

.schedule.stage: The schedule is broken into the following stages for each 
document:

   .schedule.stage.design: Design

This stage consists of the production of this documentation plan, including 
goals and requirements; detailed outlines for each document; goals, 
requirements, and justifications for each chapter of each document; and 
templates (boilerplates) for the reference manual and pool catalog.  Note that 
the level of detail of the document outlines depends in part on the existence 
of the functional specification (see also .risk.spec).

   .schedule.stage.alpha: Alpha draft

This stage consists of the production of a complete draft of the text (with 
indications of places where example code and artwork will be inserted) and a 
review.  Note that an alpha draft of the user's guide requires a working copy 
of the software or a very detailed functional specification (see also 
.risk.spec).

   .schedule.stage.beta: Beta draft

This stage consists of the production of a complete draft -- including the 
incorporation of changes based on reader comments from the alpha review, a 
preface, a glossary, code examples, and artwork -- and an additional review.

   .schedule.stage.final: Final draft

This stage consists of the production of a complete, technically accurate 
draft, including the incorporation of changes based on reader comments from the 
beta review. Once this stage is complete, only minor changes to the text can be 
accommodated; other changes will have to wait until the next release.

   .schedule.stage.production: Production

This stage consists of finalizing the example code and artwork; copyediting; 
and the creation of an index and files in HTML, PDF, PostScript, and ASCII text 
formats.  (Other formats may be added as necessary.)

   .schedule.stage.mftg: Manufacturing

This stage consists of handing the files (and possibly camera-ready copy) to 
the Manufacturing Department and waiting for the manuals to be printed.


REVIEW REQUIREMENTS

.review: Reviews should be conducted at the following points:

   .review.formal: Formal reviews should be conducted on the design documents 
(see .schedule.stage.design), draft documentation, and example code.  Formal 
review will take the place of the more traditional technical review.

   .review.other: Thorough editorial and marketing reviews should be conducted 
for manual and chapter outlines and for each stage of the drafting process.  
(Editorial reviews check that the documentation meets the Doc Group's standards 
for good documentation, and marketing reviews check that selected material, 
particularly the first chapter of the user guide, is suitable for use as 
marketing literature.)

   .review.proc: When material is ready for formal review, the writer will 
contact the MM Group to arrange for formal reviews from selected MM Group 
members (including QA, if desired).  The writer will also arrange for editorial 
reviews from selected Doc Group members.  The writer will work with the PMM to 
set up marketing reviews.   

   .review.usability-testing: In conjunction with the writer, HCI and QA should 
conduct usability testing on the outlines and the alpha and beta drafts.  The 
writer will contact HCI and QA to discuss testing schedules and procedures.

   .review.code-testing: The example code must be tested by QA.


RESOURCES -- INFORMATION

.resources.information.existing: We can use the following existing documents as 
a basis for documentation design and implementation:

   The Memory Management Information database in Spring, especially the MPS 
design document (design.mps.interface) and Richard Tucker's notes on his 
meetings with Richard (meeting.qa.*).  [Need more here. LMB]

   The mm-doc archives

.resources.information.new: New information will be provided to the writer 
through the MM Information System, email, news, telephone, and face-to-face 
meetings.

.resources.information.contacts: The primary contacts for documentation are:

   Development: Gavin Matthews
   Product Management: Nick Levine
   QA: Richard Tucker
   Support:
   Marketing: Chris Cox

The writer will probably not benefit from attending regular staff meetings, 
although it might be beneficial to sit in on a few more formal reviews.

.resources.information.updates: The writer will read the minutes of the Quartet 
meetings to obtain regular technical and scheduling updates 
(meeting.doc.1997-03-06.information), and should be informed, as soon as 
possible, of any changes to the specifications (see .risk.if-change).

.resources.information.storage: Documentation will be stored in HOPE according 
to the Documentation Group's standard policy. In addition, the writer will tag 
it, using FrameMaker's conditional text facility, and add it
to the Memory Management Information database, or another database in Spring. 
The writer will investigate the possibility of using PDF files in Spring. 
Richard prefers that both tagged PDF and plain text files be stored.  [This 
paragraph needs to be reconsidered.  LMB]


RESOURCES -- PEOPLE

.resources.people: The following roles will be involved in creating the
documentation:

   Writers: Leah Bateman
   Formal (technical) reviewers: MM Group, QA staff
   Editors: Selected members of the Documentation Group
   Other reviewers: Management, Marketing
   Usability testers: QA staff, HCI staff, writer
   Developers able to provide support: Richard Brooksby; Tucker Withington, if 
face-to-face explanations are required
   Example code developers: Selected members of the MM Group


RESOURCES -- OTHER NECESSARY

.resources.other.software:  Software:  the latest version of MS Visual C++.

.resources.other.hardware:  Hardware:  The writer's current PC should be 
sufficient, unless she needs to use Dylan, in which case she will need 128MB of 
RAM.  She will need access to a CD-ROM drive.

.resources.other.HTML:  HTML doc: a copy of WebMaker.

.resources.other.education: Background reading for the writer (an asterisk 
indicates that the material is readily accessible to the writer):

   *Wilson's papers on allocation and garbage collection techniques 
(paper.wil92, paper.wil95)
   SmartHeap manual, literature, *Web site (see rival.smartheap)
   *Purify manual (see rival.purify*)
   *a manual that describes a programming library
   Richard Jones's book on garbage collection (book.jones96)
   the Annotated ANSI C Standard (left-hand pages only)
   Gilb's book on software (book.gilb.88)
   *A book that explains object-oriented programming concepts and terminology


PRODUCTION PLAN

.production.template: The documentation will use the Documentation Group's 
standard templates (style sheets).  .production.template.ref-man.modification: 
Modifications to the reference template (style sheet) may be necessary.

.production.product: Manufacturing will be responsible for producing the books 
and the media containing code examples.  .production.product.packages: They 
will also be responsible for assembling the product packages.

.production.deliverables: The writer will provide documentation and example 
code files to Manufacturing at the completion of the production stage (see 
.schedule.stage.production).  .production.deliverables.format: Every effort 
will be made to provide these in the format most convenient for Manufacturing.

.production.software.book: The writer will produce the books and artwork using 
FrameMaker. .production.software.other: Additional graphics software will be 
used as required. 

.production.color: At this time, color is not believed to be necessary.  The 
use of color adds time and money to production, and there is no precedent at 
Harlequin for manuals printed in more than one color. [This should be cleared 
with Mktg; if there is a likelihood that color will be necessary in the end, 
the writer will obtain a detailed cost comparison.]

.production.covers: As per standard practice, Marcomm will produce the covers 
for the documentation.

.production.example-code: The development staff will produce the example code.

.production.page-size: The books will be the standard Harlequin size: 7.5" by 
9".  .production.page-count: For approximate page counts, please see .scope.*.

.production.binding.general: The user guide and reference manual will be 
perfect-bound. .production.binding.pc-cat: The pool class catalog will be in a 
looseleaf binder. 


LEGAL ISSUES

.legal.rights, .legal.safety: The documentation must contain a legal section 
that addresses customers' rights regarding products that incorporate the MM, 
and what liabilities there are for safety-critical uses.
.legal.license: This information should also be displayed prominently as part 
of the software license (for example, on the envelope containing the floppy 
disks or on the CD liner).

.legal.current.doc:  The Documentation Group currently includes legal notices 
on the copyright page of the manuals for all of Harlequin's SP products (see 
.legal.current.copyright).  In addition, there are licensing agreements for 
various SP products (see .legal.current.license).

.legal.approval: The Legal Group approved these notices sometime in 1996.  The 
Documentation Group manager and other members of the Documentation Group feel 
that the existing SP disclaimer and license will be sufficient protection for 
the MM Product.

.legal.insufficient: However, if the Quartet feels that stronger protection is 
required, they should consult with the Legal Group.

.legal.current.copyright: The following legal notice appears on the copyright 
pages of the manuals for all SP products:

"The information in this publication is provided for information only, is 
subject to change without notice, and should not be construed as a commitment 
by Harlequin Limited, Harlequin Incorporated, Harlequin Australia Pty. Limited, 
or The Harlequin Group Limited. The Harlequin Group Limited assumes no 
responsibility or liability for any errors or inaccuracies that may appear in 
this publication. The software described in this book is furnished under 
license and may only be used or copied in accordance with the terms of that 
license.

(required trademark and external copyright notices)

US Government Use

The ... Software is a computer software program developed at private expense 
and is subject to the following Restricted Rights Legend: "Use, duplication, or 
disclosure by the United States Government is subject 
to restrictions as set forth in (i) FAR 52.227-14 Alt III or (ii) FAR 
52.227-19, as applicable.  Use by agencies of the Department of Defense (DOD) 
is subject to Harlequin's customary commercial license as contained in the 
accompanying license agreement, in accordance with DFAR 227.7202-1(a).  For 
purposes of the FAR, the Software shall be deemed to be `unpublished' and 
licensed with disclosure prohibitions, rights reserved under the copyright laws 
of the United States.  Harlequin Incorporated, One Cambridge Center, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02142."

.legal.current. license:  The US version of the Development and Runtime License 
Agreement for LispWorks for the Windows Operating System includes the following 
paragraphs regarding liability (note that the UK license is different):

"...7.  Limited Warranty
Harlequin warrants for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of original 
delivery to the Customer (a) that the Software will perform substantially in 
accordance with the accompanying Harlequin published user documentation when 
used as described herein and (b) that the media containing the software will 
not prove defective under normal use.  Harlequin does not warrant that the 
Software will be error free or that the Software will meet the Customer's 
requirements.  Harlequin's sole responsibility under this warranty will be, at 
its option, (1) to replace at no additional charge any defective media 
containing the Software that are returned within the ninety (90) day warranty 
period, or (2) to use reasonable efforts to correct errors that are reported to 
Harlequin within the foregoing warranty period, or (3) to refund the license 
fees paid by the Customer for the use of the Software.  THE REMEDIES SET FORTH 
IN THIS SECTION 7 ARE THE CUSTOMER'S
SOLE AND EXCLUSIVE REMEDIES AT LAW OR IN EQUITY FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY.

8. Exclusive Remedy
TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, HARLEQUIN DISCLAIMS ALL OTHER 
WARRANTIES OR REPRESENTATIONS, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED 
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE.

9.  Limitation of Liability
IN NO EVENT SHALL HARLEQUIN BE LIABLE, IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, FOR ANY 
SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF HARLEQUIN HAS 
BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES IN ADVANCE.  IN NO EVENT SHALL 
HARLEQUIN'S LIABILITY EXCEED THE AMOUNT OF THE LICENCE FEES PAID BY THE 
CUSTOMER FOR THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE.
..."


OTHER ISSUES

.issues.other: In addition to producing documentation, the writer has been 
asked to do the following:

   .issues.other.book: Contribute to the structure of the MM book.
   .issues.other.gui: Give feedback and suggestions on the design of the 
product.

.issues.book: The writer will meet regularly with the book staff to ensure that 
the documentation and book will mesh smoothly and that the book meets 
counter-requirements from the documentation.  The writer will also be involved 
in reviews of the book, if requested.

.issues.gui: The writer will, during the course of using and documenting the 
UI, offer suggestions for improvement via the mm-doc mailing list.  The writer 
will also participate in UI design meetings and formal reviews, if requested.

.issues.i18n:  The documentation should be written in international English.  
The writer will discuss further internationalization with the Quartet.

[Are there other issues that need to be discussed or that are being put off 
until later?  LMB]


RISKS AND CONTINGENCIES

.risk.if-change:  Changes to interface will cause delays in the documentation 
schedule.  The amount of slip required depends on the size of the change and 
the stage of the documentation (see .schedule.stage.*).  Changes in the 
production stage and later cannot be reflected in the documentation.  Before 
making changes to the interface, the MM Group should consult with the writer to 
determine the cost of proposed changes.

.risk.spec:  The writer needs a product or functional specification for a 
product before writing detailed outlines and the user guide.  Lack of a product 
or functional specification will prevent any progress beyond the design stage 
(see .schedule.stage.*).

.risk.online-help:  The current writer is unfamiliar with online help systems 
for the Macintosh and UNIX platforms.  If a platform-independent method of 
generating online help is not available when the online help is started, the 
schedule (for the online help, at least) will slip.  The amount of slip 
required cannot be determined at this point.

.risk.special-doc:  Some of our customers may require specialized 
documentation.  This documentation will require extra resources for creation 
and manufacturing.  If such a requirement arises, the writer will consult with 
the Quartet to determine how to fit the specialized documentation into the 
schedule and budget (from 
meeting.doc.1997-03-11.user-prof.dylan.ref.doc.special).

[The remainder of this document has been justified.  LMB]


COUNTER-REQUIREMENTS

Successful completion of the documentation will require the following actions 
from the specified people or groups:

The Quartet

  .cr.quartet.legal:  The Quartet must investigate legal requirements.  The 
writer will provide the text of Harlequin's existing legal notices and other 
notices as a basis from which to work (from meeting.doc.1997-03-06.legal).

   .cr.quartet.i18n:  The Quartet must make a decision on internationalization 
(from meeting.doc.1997-03-06.i18n).

   .cr.quartet.coord:  The Quartet must coordinate packaging, the 
documentation, and the marketing material.  In particular, close coordination 
between the marketing material and the first chapter of the user guide is 
required, to ensure that the first chapter can act as marketing material; this 
will require reviews by the marketing staff (from 
analysis.product.prod.sw.coord, meeting.doc.1997-03-11.user-prof.doc.ch-1.mktg).

   .cr.quartet.look-feel:  The Quartet may be called on to make decisions 
regarding binding for the manuals and use of color in the manuals (from 
.production.color, .production.binding.*).

   .cr.quartet.approval:  The Quartet must approve this documentation plan 
(from .approval).

   .cr.quartet.user-info:  It would be useful to have more information 
regarding customers, especially our target audience.  One way of accomplishing 
this is for the Product Marketing Manager to research the customers and create 
an audience-experience matrix (from .analysis.user.a-e-matrix).

   .cr.quartet.pr-image:  The Quartet must establish a product image.  This 
image will affect the documentation (from meeting.doc.1997-03-06, untagged 
paragraph).


MM Group

.cr.mm.ex-code:  Selected members of the MM Group must produce example code 
where required.  The writer will attempt to identify areas that need example 
code and request code from the developers well in advance of needing it.

.cr.mm.symbol-doc:  Because the current writer is unfamiliar with the MPS at 
the moment, the MM Group will write the symbol documentation for the 
foreseeable future.  At some point, the writer may be able to write the symbol 
documentation (from mail.lmb.1997-04-15.20-06).

.cr.mm.code-templates:  The reference manual requires annotated code templates 
for the protocols.  The MM Group must write these code templates (from 
meeting.doc.1996-01-16.docissues.refman.contents).

.cr.mm.reviews:  The MM Group must conduct formal reviews of the documentation.

.cr.mm.support:  The MM Group must provide technical support to the writer.


QA

.cr.qa.reviews:  The QA staff may be requested to participate in formal reviews 
of the documentation.

.cr.qa.usability-test:  The QA staff must assist the writer and HCI staff with 
usability testing.

.cr.qa.example-test:  The QA staff must test the example code written by the 
developers.


HCI

.cr.hci.usability-test:  The HCI staff must assist the writer and QA staff with 
usability testing.


Documentation Group

.cr.doc.reviews:  Members of the Documentation Group must conduct peer reviews 
of the documentation.


Manufacturing Department

.cr.man.production:  The Manufacturing Department must produce the manuals and 
the media containing code examples, and must assemble the product packages for 
shipment to customers.


