                     MANAGING THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
                           Watts S. Humphrey
                        Addison Wesley, 01/01/89
                          ISBN: 0-201-18095-2

                            book.humphrey89
                                 draft
                            nickb 1996-07-12


ABSTRACT:

(back cover):

Watts S. Humphrey, drawing on years of experience at IBM and the SEI, provides 
here practical guidance for improving the software development and maintenance 
process. He focuses on understanding and managing the software process because 
this is where he feels organisations now encounter the most serious problems, 
and where he feels there is the best opportunity for significant improvement. 
Both program managers and practising programmers, whether working on small 
programs or large-scale projects, will learn how good their own software 
process is, how they can make their process better, and where they need to 
begin.

The book is divided into five parts, each covering a particular aspect of 
software process improvement. The order of topics follows the sequence in which 
most organisations will want to implement improvements. These topics include:

- Steps required to initiate effective software process change.
- Actions needed to establish basic control over the software process.
- Methods for specifying the development process.
- Methods for quantitative software process control.
- How to shift the focus from fixing problems to preventing them.

Humphrey conceived this book while working at the SEI on a U.S. Air Force 
project. The aim of this project was to guide the military services in 
selecting capable software contractors. The resulting method for evaluating the 
strengths and weaknesses of software organizations, reinforced by the author's 
27-years experience in various technical and management positions at IBM, will 
be invaluable to anyone involved in software development and maintenance.

REVIEWS:

nickb: 

A definitive work. Humphrey lays out the SEI's "Capability Maturity Model" (5 
levels of software process maturity, from "initial" (aka "chaotic") to 
"optimizing"), identifies key technical and management features of each level, 
and goes on to analyze them in detail. The CMM is a key model; some knowledge 
of it is necessary in order to understand a lot of discussion of software 
engineering and the software process.  

The problem with the CMM (and this book) is its rigidity. Humphrey is right to 
say that there is no point trying to move directly from level 1 to level 5, but 
he also seems to believe that no aspect of level 3, for instance, can usefully 
be applied to level 1 organizations.

However, the CMM does seem to me to be a fair reflection of the software 
industry.

"There is an urgent need for better and more effective software organizations. 
To meet this need, software managers and professionals must establish the goal 
of moving to the Optimized Process." (p.14)



