                   MEETING ABOUT WEB PAGES 1996-11-18
                         meeting.web.1996-11-18
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1996-11-18

INTRODUCTION

.who: Richard, AndiH, GavinM

.when: 1996-11-18 15:00 UT

.why: This meeting was to discuss release of the memory management external web 
pages, and the role of the Design Group.


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

.summary: The pages will be released to the Design Group on 1996-11-19, and the 
internal release will be delayed till 1996-11-22.

NOTES

.goals: AndiH expressed concern that the revised goals (of 
meeting.web.1996-11-12) were now too high-level.  Richard explained that they 
were a coherent expression of how the MM Group has seen things, and were a 
justification of the lower-level requirements (meeting.web.1996-11-12.req.web.* 
and meeting.web.1996-11-12.fun.*).

.req.web.product: AndiH expressed concern about the use of "designers" in this 
requirement.  Richard explained that this refers to developers within the MM 
Group and that this requirement exists to ensure terminological, etc. 
consistency with the MPS product.

.rel.design: It was decided to insert an additional release, to the Design 
Group, to give them a chance to give feedback.  This will occur on 1996-11-19 
Tuesday.

.rel.internal: Because of .rel.design, the broad internal review release will 
be delayed till 1996-11-22 Friday.  For the purpose of this release, the pages 
will move to the internal mirror (see .web.system).

.review: Another formal review of a selection of the pages will be held, some 
time like the afternoon of 1996-12-02 Monday.  This will concentrate on 
content.  Leah <LMB> will be invited to attend remotely, in addition to AndiH.

.rider: For both .rel.design and .rel.internal, Richard and GavinM will design 
a rider which explains the status of the pages and the types of feedback which 
are appropriate (see .act.design.rider and .act.internal.rider).

.email.name: It was decided that the mm-web alias, being used as a discussion 
group, was inappropriate as a direct external contact address.  GavinM will 
investigate sorting this out with Systems (see .act.email).

.maint.resp: The maintenance of the pages will be the responsibility of the MM 
Group.

.email.resp: Tracking and responding to email response will be the 
responsibility of the MM Group.

.rel.schedule: Future releases of the Memory Management Reference will be on a 
two-monthly cycle [except in emergencies -- AndiH].

.web.system: There is a new system for loading pages onto the external web 
server.  They now go onto webhost.long:83 [for the interim -- AndiH], and are 
gated via a Spring-based approval system for Responsible/MarComm/Legal.  It was 
agreed that the MM group would, in general, be responsible and would work out 
the procedure for this.

.web.url: The URL should be short and memorable.  It was agreed that there 
should be a bottom level directory called "mm", and a sub-directory called 
"reference".  The URL would hence be <URL:http://harlequin.com/mm/reference/>.  
See .act.dir.

.delivery: The MM Group will deliver the pages to MarComm as a package, i.e. a 
directory containing HTML pages.  [plus sub-directories, and GIF files, of 
course -- GavinM] [Or as a tar file if that is more convenient to MarComm -- 
AndiH]
 

ACTIONS

.act.design.rider: (GavinM, Richard) Design rider for Design release.

.act.internal.rider: (GavinM, Richard) Design rider for internal release.

.act.email: (GavinM) Sort out address for external contact.

.act.dir: (AndiH) Create directories on web servers.

