                     GUIDE TO WRITING REQUIREMENTS
                            guide.design.req
                              obsolete doc
                           gavinm 1997-03-03

.scope: This is a guide to assist in the creation and specification of 
requirements.

.readership: This document is for the use of any MM developer and anyone who is 
involved in the specification of requirements for the MM group.


DEFINITIONS

.def: A requirement is a specification of what a product is expected to acheive 
in a specific release or product version.  It can be either functional (see 
.fun) or attribute (.attr).


Functional requirements

.fun: A functional requirement specifies some aspect of functionality or 
feature which must be entirely present to be at all useful.

.fun.satis: A function requirement has a boolean satisfaction.  It should be 
possible to determine whether a product satisfies a functional requirement (to 
some confidence).


Attribute Requirements

.attr: An attribute requirement specifies some quantitative aspect of product 
behaviour which can be specified numerically.

.attr.satis: An attribute requirement's satisfaction level should be 
measureable for a give release of the product.

.attr.plan: An attribute requirement should be associated with a planned 
satisfaction level for any product version.

.attr.now: If appropriate, an attribute requirement should be associated with a 
historical satisfaction level, for use in planning.

.attr.worst: If appropriate, an attribute requirement should be associated with 
a worst acceptable satisfaction level for a given product version.  This should 
be less than or equal to the planned level (see .attr.plan).

.attr.best: If appropriate, an attribute requirement may be associated with a 
best possible satisfaction level, based on theoretical results or market 
comparison.  This should be greater than or equal to the planned level (see 
.attr.plan).

.attr.metric: If appropriate, an attribute requirement specification should 
include a specification of a metric to assess satisfaction.


Requirement Sets

.set.min: A set of requirements should be minimal to meet the goals.  Ask 
yourself: Would it be possible to meet these goals without technically meeting 
all these requirements?  If so, there is a redundant, or poorly specified 
requirement.

.set.suff: A set of requirements should be sufficient to meet the goals.  Ask 
yourself: Is there a perverse way to meet the requirements but leave the goals 
unsatisfied?  If so, there is a missing requirement.


TESTS

.test: If what you have is a requirement, then the answer to the following 
questions should be "yes":

.test.specific: Is the requirement specific about what is to be acheived?

.test.measure: Is the requirement's satisfaction measureable?

.test.version: Is the requirement related to a specific product version or 
release?

[This list doesn't contain elements such as: 
  - Satisfying the requirement is the responsibility of a certain person;
  - The satisfaction of the requirement is a reasonable burden on development.
these should be reflected somewhere else. -- GavinM 1997-03-03]

