                     MM/DYLAN MEETING ON 1997-09-02
                        meeting.dylan.1997-09-02
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-09-02

INTRODUCTION

.intro: John Hothckiss <jh>, Jonathan Bachrach <jonathan>, Kevin Mitchell 
<mitchell>, Tony Mann <tony>, Richard Brooksby <richard>, Nick Levine <nick>, 
and Gavin Matthews <gavinm> met to discuss adjustment of MM/Dylan requirements 
and schedules.  


SCHEDULES

.sched.mm: The original schedule for MM-Dylan was to release honeybee at the 
end of August, and cottonwood at the end of October.

.sched.dylan: Dylan plan to freeze development of their full beta at the end of 
September, and ship it in October.  The product will ship in December.


SPEED/PERFORMANCE

.speed: Dylan are quite happy with the performance improvements in later 
sunflower releases, although the MPS is still taking more system time than 
Boehm, a useful performance measure.

There is concern about the pathological behaviour betwen hashtables/databases 
and GC.  This is preventing people from working, as they can't compile the 
compiler and environment.  

The clamp/release planned for honeybee will help with this.  Metering support 
is available for hashtables.  It might be helpful to report the generation of 
an address, or to print location dependencies.  Tony will talk to people and 
reproduce the problem.


SIZE

.size: The aim for the full beta is to have the whole environment run 
comfortably on a 32M machine under Windows 95 or NT, compiling the Othello DUIM 
example.  This is essential rather than critical, but we need to be close.

To effect this, Dylan need to know about their memory usage.  The sort of 
things that might be useful are to:
  - Detect leaks from unknown roots;
  - Obtain second order stats on the heap;
  - Trace all roots and get second order statistics (including roots);
  - Trace to get live data without collecting it;
  - Trace from a particular object, avoiding certain slots, and types.

In any case, the ability to detect the amount of live heap, essentially the 
collect world function, is urgently required.  This can be applied as a patch 
to sunflower, given a few days.


OTHER

.wrapper: The wrapper changes can be tested using negative offsets in the 
wrappers without additional support from MM (because wrappers are not 
registered as formatted roots).  See mail.richard.1997-08-19.08-36 for details.


CONCLUSIONS

.conc.collect-world: MM will urgently produce a patch for sunflower that 
supports collect-world, and heap-size.  This should be available early next 
week (specifically by 1997-09-10).

.conc.doc: MM will produce technical documentation for the new functionality in 
honeybee (particularly finalization, clamp/park/release, in-mm detection) as 
soon as possible.  This should appear gradually over the next couple of weeks 
(specifically by 1997-09-17).  As technical documentation it can be quite 
rough, so long as it's usuable.

.conc.honeybee: Honeybee will be released with the existing specification by 
1997-09-24.

.conc.early: It may be possible to make an early under-tested release of 
honeybee for interface testing.  This would be for limited distribution, the 
details to be negotiated with Tony.  It is unlikely to be before 1997-09-17.

.conc.meet: It will be helpful for MM/Dylan to hold a regular meeting on 
Tuesdays at 15:00 UK local time (10:00 1CC local time).

