                    PROCEDURE FOR DETAILED PLANNING
                            proc.plan.detail
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1998-04-28

INTRODUCTION

.intro: This procedure is for detailed planning of tasks, once there is a good 
idea of what needs to be done to meet the client's requirements in a certain 
timeframe.  This procedure gives weight to long-term things that may never be 
feasible in any release cycle.


PROCEDURE


Phase One

.tasks: Identify the tasks involved.

.dep: Identify any dependencies between the tasks.  A dependency is where one 
task is significantly easier to do if another is done first.  There may be some 
variation in the weight of these dependencies.

.effort: Estimate the effort of each task.  This may be a range.

.priority: Classify these tasks into three priorities:  Important (aka 
critical), Normal (aka essential), and Bumpable (aka optional or nice).  
Suggested symbols: IB

.open: Note which tasks are open-ended.  An open-ended task is one where there 
is strong benefit after some initial effort, but a continuing increase in 
benefit for increased effort.  Suggested symbol: O 

.risk: Identify those tasks that are risky.  A task is risky if there is a 
significant likelihood that it will not give anything like its estimated 
benefits for its estimated effort.  Suggested symbol: R

.ratio: Identify those tasks that give a good benefit to cost ratio.  This will 
typically be the tasks with low cost.  Suggested Symbol: H.


Phase Two

.order: Chose an ordering on tasks grouping them in sets by combinations of 
attributes; for example:
  .order.1: Not Bumpable and Risky or High ratio;
  .order.2: Not Bumpable and neither Risky nor High ratio;
  .order.3: Bumpable and Risky or High ratio;
  .order.4: Bumpable and neither Risky nor High ratio.

.total: Total the effort estimate for the each set.

.effort.available: Estimate the effort available under a range of scheduling 
and resource scenarios.

.compare: Compare the available effort with the effort required, and determine 
how far down the ordering will be feasible.

.select: Select the tasks to be done by their feasibility.

.adapt: Use the results of this planning to adapt to future changes in resource 
availability, schedule, and actual effort required.

