                HOW TO COMMUNICATE TECHNICAL INFORMATION
                    Jonathan Price and Henry Korman
        The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company, Inc., 01/06/93
                             0-8053-6829-9

                               book.pk93
                               incomplete
                             lmb 1997-10-23


ABSTRACT:

From the back of the book:

In "How to Communicate Technical Information", you will learn how to write 
printed and online computer documentation that is simple, clear, interesting, 
and user-friendly.  Technical writers Jonathan Price and Henry Korman map out 
easy-to-follow methods and include practical tips to help you create hardware 
and software documentation that is accessible to both beginning and experienced 
end-users.

"How to Communicate Technical Information":

*  Discusses easy-to-follow and user-friendly ways of organizing information.

*  Demonstrates how to use art to communicate context, multiple options, and 
results.

*  Offers new ways to present both quick start options for experienced users 
and installation instructions.

*  Presents effective new methods for supplying computer-based training (CBT), 
including sophisticated graphic and hpertext tours, and demonstrations.

*  Includes information on online help that suggests methods for integrating 
this feature into your documentation.

Throughout the book, the authors share the techniques they present in their 
popular seminars as they provide straightforward and interesting ways of 
organizing information.  Price and Korman also suggest practical methods for 
developing good writing styles.

REVIEWS:

From <URI:http://www.amazon.com/>:

Synopsis:
This revision of an innovative bestseller teaches methods for writing computer 
documentation that is simple,
clear, interesting, and user friendly. The authors also feature increased 
coverage of installation instructions and
the trend towards quick starts for experienced users. 

Book News, Inc., 10/01/93:
Technical writers explain how to write printed and online computer 
documentation that is simple, clear,
interesting, and as user-friendly (at least) as the hardware or software it 
explains. They consider planning the
writing project; ways of organizing information; communicating context, 
multiple options, and results;
providing fast tracks for experienced users; integrating on-line help; and 
other aspects. Includes an extensive
and wide ranging bibliography. Annotation copyright Book News, Inc. Portland, 
Or. 

Table of Contents
Pt. 1. Planning 
     Ch. 1. The Project Cycle - What You Do at Each Stage 
     Ch. 2. Gathering Information 
     Ch. 3. Understanding Your Audience and Their Work 
     Ch. 4. Learning the Product 
     Ch. 5. Planning the Documentation 
     Ch. 6. Developing a Schedule and Estimating Costs 
     Ch. 7. As You Work 
Pt. 2. Writing 
     Ch. 8. Openers - Tables of Contents and Introductions 
     Ch. 9. Getting Users Started 
     Ch. 10. Tutorials 
     Ch. 11. Computer-Based Training 
     Ch. 12. Procedures 
     Ch. 13. Reference Materials 
     Ch. 14. Indexes and Glossaries 
     Ch. 15. Job Aids or Quick Reference Cards 
     Ch. 16. Online Help 
Pt. 3. Revising 
     Ch. 17. Getting feedback 
     Ch. 18. Rewriting Drafts 
     Ch. 19. Refining Your Style 
     Ch. 20. Updating a Manual 
     Ch. 21. Reviewing Someone Else's Manual 
Bibliography 
Index 



