                         SEARCH-TEST TX-M-NS-TX
                    comments.search-test.tx-m-ns-tx
                              obsolete doc
                          richardk 1998-10-22

I said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not in my tongue.
I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle: while the ungodly is in my sight.
I held my tongue, and spake nothing: I kept silence, yea, even from good words; 
but it was pain and grief to me.
My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musing the fire kindled: and 
at the last I spake with my tongue;
Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I may be certified 
how long I have to live.
Behold, thou hast made my days as it were a span long: and mine age is even as 
nothing in respect of thee; and verily every man living is altogether vanity.
For man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth 
up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.
And now, Lord, what is my hope: truly my hope is even in thee.
Deliver me from all mine offences: and make me not a rebuke unto the foolish.
I became dumb, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing.
Take thy plague away from me: I am even consumed by means of thy heavy hand.
When thou with rebukes dost chasten man for sin, thou makest his beauty to 
consume away, like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is 
but vanity.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not thy 
peace at my tears.
For I am a stranger with thee: and a sojourner, as all my fathers were.
O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength: before I go hence, and be 
no more seen.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

malign notes

O most powerful and glorious Lord God, the Lord of hosts, that rulest and 
commandest all things: Thou sittest in the throne judging right, and therefore 
we make our address to thy
Divine Majesty in this our necessity, that thou woutdest take the cause into 
thine own hand, and judge between us and our enemies. Stir up thy strength, O 
Lord, and come and help
us; for thou givest not alway the battle to the strong, but canst save by many 
or by few. O let not our sins now cry against us for vengeance; but hear us thy 
poor servants begging
mercy, and imploring thy help, and that thou woutdest he a defence unto us 
against the face of the enemy. Make it appear that thou art our Saviour and 
mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
http://www.eskimo.com/~lhowell/bcp1662/

This sentence makes no mention of apples whatsoever.
The subject of pineapples is not touched upon here.

