                     L5: PROCESS CHANGE MANAGEMENT
                                kpa.pcm
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Process Change 
Management, a key area of Level 5 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Process Change Management is to continually improve 
the software processes used in the organization with the intent of improving 
software quality, increasing productivity, and decreasing the cycle time for 
product development.

Process Change Management involves defining process improvement goals and, with 
senior management sponsorship, proactively and systematically identifying, 
evaluating, and implementing improvements to the organization's standard 
software process and the projects' defined software processes on a continuous 
basis.

Training and incentive programs are established to enable and encourage 
everyone in the organization to participate in process improvement activities. 
Improvement opportunities are identified and evaluated for potential payback to 
the organization. Pilot efforts are performed to assess process changes before 
they are incorporated into normal practice.

When software process improvements are approved for normal practice, the 
organization's standard software process and the projects' defined software 
processes are revised as appropriate. The practices for revising the 
organization's standard software process are found in the Organization Process 
Definition key process area, and the practices for revising the projects' 
defined software processes are found in the Integrated Software Management key 
process area.


GOALS

.goal.plan: Continuous process improvement is planned.

.goal.part: Participation in the organization's software process improvement 
activities is organization wide.

.goal.imp: The organization's standard software process and the projects' 
defined software processes are improved continuously.

