                  PLAN FOR THE JAVA-BENCHMARK PRODUCT
                          plan.java-benchmark
                             incomplete doc
                             lth 1998-06-25

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document outlines the progress plan for the java-benchmark project 
(see analysis.java-benchmark and design.java-benchmark).

.readership: MM group members.


MILESTONES

Initial Design

.initial-design:  Complete an initial design of the benchmark suite (see 
design.java-benchmark).  The design will address the following main points:

  - which aspects of Java MM to measure
  - outline of the benchmark program suite
  - the measurement technology and benchmark framework needed
  - general guidelines for benchmark implementation

.initial-design.review: the initial design will be reviewed by the group; the 
review will proceed in parallel with the implementation phase.

.initial-design.deadline: 1998-06-29

.initial-design.executor: lth


Initial Implementation and Test

.initial-implementation:  Initial implementation of all benchmarks to the point 
where they work with JDK 1.1.5 (Solaris) and Netscape 4.05 (Solaris).  The test 
platforms are so chosen because they are available to the tester and because 
they are sufficiently incompatible (Netscape implements a subset of Java 1.1).

.initial-implementation.review: The initial implementation will be reviewed by 
the group; the review will proceed in parallel with the test phase.

.initial-implementation.time: 3 weeks

.initial-implementation.deadline: 1998-07-31

.initial-implementation.executor: lth


Test and Review

.test:  Test the benchmarks extensively on other Java implementations (the list 
should include Microsoft, Apple, Metrowerks, Symantec).  Review the benchmarks' 
appropriateness, effectiveness, and portability, with the benefit of experience 
from the additional Java implementations, and tune, re-implement, modify, 
replace, or discard the benchmarks as necessary.

.test.time: 2 weeks

.test.deadline: 1998-08-17

.test.executor: lth


Java VM / MPS Integration

.product.java: In this phase, several unrelated activities progress in parallel:

 - .product.java.internal-release: Publish benchmarks internally or to another 
restricted but interested audience in order to solicit feedback.

 - product.java.cleanup: clean up the benchmarks further as indicated by 
external or internal comments, experience, and so on.

 - .product.java.mps-integration: integrate the MPS into a JVM.

 - .product.java.mps-benchmark: benchmark the MPS in a JVM and compare it to 
other implementations.

.product.java.executor: lth (undetermined tasks), ptw (obtaining JVM, 
licensing, work estimates, undetermined other tasks)

.product.java.deadline: not set (lth departs 1998-09-24)

