               PROCEDURE FOR PROCESS BRAINSTORM IN REVIEW
                         proc.review.brainstorm
                               draft proc
                           gavinm 1997-06-12


INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document describes the procedure for holding a process brainstorm 
meeting as part of formal review.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone acting as a review leader.

.just: The purpose of holding a process brainstorm meeting is to meet the 
second goal of review (see process.review.goal.prevent) by finding ways to 
prevent the reoccurance of defects.  This closes the process improvement loop.


PROCEDURE

In Advance

.choose: The leader chooses 3-6 major defects or groups of major defects (see 
guide.review.class.major) found in review.  He makes this choice based on their 
importance and his own experience of which defects can be most profitably 
attacked.


In The Meeting

.time: The process brainstorm should last no more than around 30 minutes.

.record: The brainstorm should be recorded in the review log as best as the 
scribe may.  This may be deferred if the process brainstorm takes place by some 
logged medium, such as IRC.

.remind: The leader reminds participants that their purpose is to find process 
improvements that would have prevented major defects from occurring.

.raise: The leader raises each issue in turn, reminding participants of the 
issue, and asking how it happenned and what could have prevented it.

.disc: The participants should discuss each defect for no more than about five 
minutes.  They should focus on how the defect arose, and what improvement could 
prevent it.  The leader should be firm in curtailing discussion of how the 
defect can be fixed.

.proc: If time permits, the leader may solicit criticisms of the review process 
and apply .disc to them.


After The Meeting

.act: The review leader should derive requests and solution suggestions for the 
process product from the record, and should note these in the review record 
where appropriate.


