              PROCEDURE FOR CREATING A WEEKLY PLAN FOR DRJ
                          proc.drj.plan.weekly
                              obsolete doc
                             drj 1998-07-06

INTRO

.intro: This document describes a procedure to create drj's weekly plan.  
.assume.drj: It is currently assumed that you are drj.  (see person.drj).

OVERVIEW

.overview: The procedure is divided into N-phases: Garner, Cost, Select, Mail.  
In the garner phase a number of source are examined and potential tasks are 
identified and collected.  In the cost phase these tasks are prioritised and 
time estimates are made.  In the select phase a number of the tasks are 
selected to be worked on that week.  A summary of the selected tasks is created 
and mailed round, to drj's manager (currently person.gavinm), to his group 
(currently mm).

PLACE

.place: Currently the plan is prepared in UNIX in the directly 
$HOME/t/protean/plan.  The plan is in a file whose named corresponds to the 
isodate of the creation of the plan.  So /u/drj/t/protean/1998-09-01 is where 
one such plan can be found.

Garner

.phase.garner: The following sources are examined and any likely tasks 
extracted: mail messages - current in box, MM Product Evolution, last week's 
plan, Notes drj's To Do List, contents of drj's desktop (for papers, listings, 
printouts of design, mail messages, etc), drj's idea of the "big picture", "is 
there anything else I should be doing?".  I suppose he really ought to ask his 
manager as well.

Cost

.phase.cost: Each task is costed very roughly.  With a granularity of a day.

Select

.phase.select: Sufficient tasks to occupy drj for the week are selected.  
Including some of the most important and urgent ones.

Mail

.phase.mail: The tasks are written into a mail message.  The mail messages 
should have a section for Tasks (ie things to do), and a section for 
Deliverables (documents etc that will be created / change state).  Try and keep 
it to one line per thing.  This mail message is then mailed to drj's group (mm) 
and his manager (daveb).

