             PROCEDURE TO CREATE A REQUEST IN MM EVOLUTION
                          proc.request.create
                            incomplete proc
                           gavinm 1997-03-12


.intro: See proc.darwin for scope, readership, update procedure, and additional 
procedural notes.  See also guide.request.

.check-requests: (Optional) Check the existing requests for one that covers the 
one you are creating.

.saving: Note that you must close the document after saving for the first 
time.  If you want to save and continue working on a request you must reopen 
the document.  This is because the Notes mechanism to number requests 
automatically might otherwise cause a Save or Replication Conflict.

.select-product: Select the product, or a request or change already associated 
with that product.

.compose-request: Compose a request document.  If asked whether to inherit the 
contacts list, select "No".

.check-product: Check you got the right product by looking at the "product" 
field below the title.

.summary: Fill in a summary of the request.  See 
guide.request.summary(important).

.type: Fill in the request type as either "fix" (for problems with old 
requirements ("bugs")) or "feature" (for new requirements).  See 
guide.request.type.

.status: Status.  The status should be "Waiting" at this stage, even if you 
intend to write an analysis and propose a solution.  You can change the status 
later, _after_ you've done those things.  You might get interrupted.  It 
happens a lot.  

.owner: Ownership.  Whose job is it to deal with this next?  It's usually the 
manager of the product.  [Procedure to determine this to be determined -- 
GavinM 1997-03-12]  That person will be taking the request and doing something 
about it.  It could be you.

[What about the ratings questionnaire? -- GavinM 1997-04-01]

[Note: We are seeking to have default values (templates) for the description 
fields; this may make this part of the procedure easier. -- GavinM 1997-03-12]

.light: Some requests are very lightweight and their solution is obvious.  This 
is rare and usually means the solution has been implied in the request.  In 
this case it is permissible to skip subsequent steps except .contacts and 
.close.

.description: Start the Request Description field with a problem or requirement 
description (under PROBLEM DESCRIPTION or REQUIREMENT DESCRIPTION).  See 
guide.request.desc.desc.

.suggestions: Suggestions (optional).  If you have some idea about how to 
satisfy this request add suggestions (under SUGGESTIONS).  See 
guide.request.desc.sugg.
  
.define: At this stage, if you are also responsible for defining the request, 
you may wish to fill in the analysis, solutions, etc.  This is OK -- you are 
effectively folding two procedures together.  Be sure to read 
proc.request.define.

.underlying: Underlying issues (optional).  If you have a suggestion for 
preventing this kind of problem in future, enter a process improvement as.  See 
guide.request.desc.under.  [GavinM, please consider how the process can 
automatically pick up these improvements and deal with them.  richard 
1997-03-14] [It will be difficult to track which improvements have been picked 
up and which haven't without support from the database. -- GavinM 1997-03-18 ]

.related: Related Requests (optional).  If there are any related requests, 
enter the list here.  See guide.request.desc.related.

[What about exhibits? -- GavinM 1997-03-14]

.originator:  Usually, someone in MM realised the need for the request: put "MM 
Development" in the "Customers originating request" field.  (This is correct 
even if the need for the request follows from an agreed customer requirement, 
as usually happens).  But if a customer (someone outside the MM group) 
contacted us to get this specific request created, then they originated the 
request: enter them in the "Customers originating request" field.

.originator.just: (Things the customer explicitly asks us for need more 
sensitive handling than things we schedule on our own initiative).

.contacts: Enter relevant contacts.  See guide.request.desc.contact, but in 
particular do not enter external addresses.

.close: Close (and save) the (request) document.


