              COVERSATION WITH GEROGE CLELAND, 1997-05-29
                        meeting.spman.1997-05-29
                             incomplete doc
                            nick 1997-05-30

.leah

George had believed that Ken Jackson would be invited to this week's
quartet meeting, so we could apprise him of the issues and
consequences. 

George will now discuss this with Glenn and hopes to resolve it at
that level. (Have we heard that before?)

I suggest I contact him again early next week and ask what Glenn said,
as a means of ensuring he actually makes the contact this time.

Failing this, it might be productive for us to get our acts together
and indeed invite Ken to a future meeting.


.licensing

We went through the mail I sent him 2 weeks ago.

Clarification, re "No runtime royalty on libraries": The libraries
themselves will not be for redistribution. I understand George as
being concerned that what we allow our users to hand on "for free" is
restricted to applications which have already linked our libraries.

George suggests that "Evaluation restricted - the activation key for
evaluators permits use only of the dropin libraries and analysis
tools" should be modified to, essentially,
  "Evaluation restricted - the activation key for evaluators permits use
   only of the dropin libraries and a subset of the analysis tools"
His point is that if more tools than the dropin analysis technology
are visible at evaluation time, this may be more of an enticement to
purchase. 

He is concerned that the full-price product is positioned so that
there is a clear advantage in buying it. He is happy with the strategy
if the price range is $100-200. If it's in the $1K mark then the
strategy would not be rejected out-of-hand, but it would need to be
reviewed.

I pointed out that the OEM dream (eg m/soft) would need to be
structured so as to earn us more than $100(0).

George is clearly keen on our evaluation scenario.

I will now prod legal to check they have no objections, and assemble
what we've got in MM Info (as an Idea?)


