                  PROCEDURE FOR A REVIEW EDIT SESSION
                           proc.edit-session
                             obsolete proc
                           gavinm 1996-10-28


INTRODUCTION

.scope: This documents the procedure for organising simultaneous review edits.  
It is not necessary to follow this procedure to perform review edits.

.purpose: This procedure is to be performed as an aid to clearing up edit 
backlogs.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone acting as an edit session 
leader.


PROCEDURE

.plan: The review leader must:
  .plan.ko: Decide when and where the kick-off meeting is;
  .plan.people: Decide who will be attend (i.e. those with edits to perform);
  .plan.invite: Invite the participants.

.ko: At the kick-off meeting:
  .ko.doc: The leader creates a document to record the edit session;
  .ko.time: The leader agrees a time for the report meeting;
  .ko.remind: The leader reminds participants of the purpose of the edit 
session (to bring documents in edit to exit);
  .ko.goal: The leader states any goals in terms of document or issue rates;
  .ko.predict: Every participant states which documents he expects to bring to 
exit in the edit session, and how many unresolved issues each has;
  .ko.avail: The leader remind participants that everyone should be available 
for review questions, and that the leader is available to answer procedural 
questions, and to perform exit.

.edit: During the edit period:
  .edit.leader: The review leader will be available to answer procedural 
questions;
  .edit.exit: The review leader will be available for exits;
  .edit.consult: All participants will be available for consultation to resolve 
review issues. [How to avoid general discussion?]

.report: At the report meeting:
  .report.all: All participants report their progress, both exits and partial, 
including issue counts;
  .report.compare: The review leader compares actual and predicted progress;
  .report.metrics: The review leader compares actual rates with goals.

.brainstorm: A process brainstorm is held, to last no more than thirty minutes, 
in which:
  .brainstorm.report: The review leader invites each participants to describe 
one (or at most two) problem which has delayed or prevented exit;
  .brainstorm.discuss: Each problem raise is discussed (for no more than five 
minutes) to determine the root cause, and a procedural change to prevent 
reoccurance.


