               MEETING OF MM/EP-CORE ON 1998-07-10 FRIDAY
                       meeting.epcore.1998-07-10
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1998-07-16

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Gavin Matthews met briefly with Dave T Berry to discuss various issues 
of MM/EP-Core scheduling and requirements.


MV2

.mv2.gavinm: Gavin reported that the MV2 was due to be integrated into a 
ScriptWorks image for evaluation in the next week.  This testing will inform MM 
planning about what is remaining to be done on MV2, but the remaining work is 
currently estimated at around 3 man-months.  It should prove possible to 
produce MV2 in about two calendar months.  It will probably be possible to 
produce something for wider evaluation (a "technology release") within about 
one month, but that must not be shipped to any customers.

.mv2.dtb: SW 5.0 is due at the end of October, and there will be a development 
slow-down in mid-September.  Consequently, mid-September is when MV2 will need 
to be delivered by to get into SW 5.0.  An evaluation version in Mid-August 
will be useful.  We will need to do a risk analysis towards September to see 
whether MV2 is going to make it, and what else can be done.


POSTSCRIPT GC

.gc.dtb: PostScript GC is definitely slipped to SW 5.1.


QA

.qa.gavinm: It would be nicer if MM/EP-Core problems could be found further 
upstream, by QA instead of customers.

.qa.dtb: It's a hard problem, but it's being worked on.


PERFORMANCE

.perf.gavinm: There are various small performance enhancements that will become 
available in the next couple of months.  It should be possible to ship them 
together with the MV2 releases without any problems.

.perf.dtb: Performance enhancements are always useful.


ASSERTIONS

.assert.id.gavinm: MM propose to replace their current (somewhat unhelpful) 
error messages with IDs that persist between releases, and that can be related 
to a continually updated database of information on likely causes and 
workarounds.  The database will become populated gradually.  The schedule for 
these is undetermined, but it is likely to be started sometime this year.

.assert.id.dtb: IDs will not be significantly less useful than the current 
messages.  They will only be useful if the database of messages is kept up to 
date.

.assert.release.gavinm: MM offer the choice of having a selection of useful 
assertions in a release build at a small performance overhead.  This won't be 
useful unless assertions are logged in release builds, which they apparently 
aren't.  This might enable a response to a customer problem without having to 
wait until the problem is reproduced in a debugging version of ScriptWorks.

.assert.release.dtb: Assertions aren't [it said "are" but that's not true] 
logged in release builds, but this wouldn't enable any significantly faster 
response to a customer problem, and therefore no performance overhead is 
acceptable.

