            STAKEHOLDER INTEREST ANALYSIS OF PROCESS PROJECT
                            interest.process
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-04-15

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This is an analysis of everyone who has an interest in the Process 
Project (project.process).

.readership: This document is intended for anyone who has an interest in the 
process project.

.source: The sources of information are the people concerned or as indicated, 
throughout.

.note: The interests described herein are comments arising from discussions.  
They don't represent the formal position or goal set of any person or group.  
As this document is several-removed from actual process development, it is 
intended to be a rough picture of interests, rather than an agreed requirements 
specification.

.hist.0: 1997-04-15  GavinM  First written after talking to DRJ, Richard, 
NickB, PTW, LMB, and AndrewS.

.hist.1: 1997-04-16  GavinM  Incorporated AndrewS' comments on my writeup.  
Spoke to Tony and PaulH.

.hist.2: 1997-04-17  GavinM  Spoke to RIT.  Invented some stuff about 
manufacturing.

.hist.3: 1997-04-25  GavinM  Spoke to DaveP.


STAKEHOLDERS


MM Group Developers

.dev.drj: DRJ wants:
  .dev.dej.int: To satisfy his intellectual curiosity;
  .dev.drj.prof: To advance his professional development;
  .dev.drj.help: Help to do his job;
  .dev.drj.nice: To find work pleasant.

.dev.gavinm: GavinM wants:
  .dev.gavinm.task: To know what he has to do;
  .dev.gavinm.time: To leave time for a social life;
  .dev.gavinm.nasty: To avoid having people be nasty to him;
  .dev.gavinm.mistake: To avoid making mistakes;
  .dev.gavinm.prof: To develop professional expertise in software process.

.dev.nickb: NickB wants:
  .dev.nickb.feel-good: To feel better about his work by producing quality 
software;
  .dev.nickb.env: A non-crappy development environment;
  .dev.nickb.prof: To advance his professional development both by 
accumumulating process buzzwords on his CV, and by producing good products;
  .dev.nickb.hqn: To be well though of in Harlequin, again by producing good 
products.

.dev.ptw: PTW wants:
  .dev.ptw.pers: To improve his personal process;
  .dev.ptw.learn: To learn about process, although he is sceptical;
  .dev.ptw.time: To save time, i.e. to help him get his job done quicker or 
with less effort;
  .dev.ptw.task: To know what he has to do.

.dev.richard: Richard (wearing a "plain developer" hat) wants:
  .dev.richard.task: To know what he has to do, i.e. have well-defined tasks;
  .dev.richard.well: To be able to do things well;
  .dev.richard.nice: To find work enjoyable;
  .dev.richard.interest: To find work challenging in an interesting, rather 
than routine, way.


Management

.man.group: MM Group Management (currently Richard) wants:
  .man.group.control: Control, by access to information, and the ability to 
make informed tactical and strategic decisions;
  .man.group.success: To succeed in the goals of the Group;
  .man.group.staff: To ensure the well-being of group members;

.man.quartet: MM Product Quartets want (according to Richard):
  .man.quartet.time: Products delivered on time.

.man.board: Harlequin's Board of Directors want (according to Richard):
  .man.board.revenue: Successful products in terms of revenue;
  .man.board.image: Successful products in terms of Harlequin's public image.


Collaborators

.coll.lfcs: LFCS want (as derived from goal.lfcs by GavinM):
  .coll.lfcs.formal: To promote the use of formal methods;
  .coll.lfcs.learn: To learn about software engineering;
  .coll.lfcs.comm: To communicate clearly with the MM Group.

.coll.ukc: UKC want ???.


Customers of Other MM Group Products

.cust: Customers of the MM Group's other products want (according to Richard, 
Tony, and DaveP):
  .cust.resp: The MM Group to be responsive;
  .cust.solve: To have all their problems solved;
  .cust.trust: To have trust in the MM Group;
  .cust.release: To be fully informed about release schedules and intended 
specifications;
  .cust.request: To be able to request new features in products;
  .cust.report: To be able to report bugs and problems easily;
  .cust.fast: To be able to request fast turnaround on demand for showstopper 
problems;
  .cust.timely: The MM Group to provide timely releases that can fit it with 
integration requirements;
  .cust.consult: The MM Group to provide good consultancy for problems and 
potential problems.


Customers of the MM Group's Process Product

.proc.dev: Other development groups want (according to DaveP):
  .proc.dev.imp: Exported process to be an obvious improvement over existing 
process;
  .proc.dev.simple: Exported process to be simple enough to use;
  .proc.dev.doc: Exported process to have clear documentation;
  .proc.dev.know: To known what they have to do.

.proc.doc: The Documentation Group wants (according to LMB and AndrewS):
  .proc.doc.system: A system for organising and archiving information;
  .proc.doc.share: Easier access to shared information;
  .proc.doc.apply: To see the process product as something which can be applied 
to the production of documentation, to do it better;
  .proc.doc.partial: To be able to take up part of the process product.

.proc.qa: The QA Group wants (according to RIT):
  .proc.qa.info: To develop personal organisation of information;
  .proc.qa.plan: To develop personal planning system;
  .proc.qa.training: To have the opportunity to be trained in MM Group 
practices;
  .proc.qa.eval: To be able to evaluate what I'm doing.

.proc.market: Marketing want ???.

.proc.sales: Sales want ???.

.proc.manuf: Manufacturing want ???.

.proc.pdm: Product Management want (according to DaveP):
  .proc.pdm.simple: Exported process to be simple enough to adopt and use;
  .proc.pdm.compat: Exported process to be compatible with existing process;
  .proc.pdm.doc: Exported process to be clearly documented;
  .proc.pdm.mod: Exported process to be modular, in the sense that it can be 
adopted piecemeal;
  .proc.pdm.life: Exported process should make life easier.


Other Harlequin Groups with a Working Relationship with the MM Group

.rel.doc: MM Documentors want (according to LMB and AndrewS):
  .rel.doc.task: To know the things they need to do;
  .rel.doc.info: To be able to pull information together;
  .rel.doc.comm: To be able to communicate easily with the MM Group;
  .rel.doc.easy: To be able to pick up MM Group practices cheaply;
  .rel.doc.training: To have the opportunity to be trained in MM Group 
practices.

.rel.qa: MM QA wants (according to RIT):
  .rel.qa.task: To know what it has to do;
  .rel.qa.spec: To have good specifications of intended product behaviour;
  .rel.qa.sched: MM to have reliable schedules;
  .rel.qa.find: It to be easy to find information;
  .rel.qa.comm: To have good communication with the MM group;
  .rel.qa.bur: To be bureaucracy-free.

.rel.market: MM Marketing want ???.

.rel.sales: MM Sales want ???.

.rel.manuf: MM Manufacturing want (according to GavinM):
  .rel.manuf.comm: Published schedules;
  .rel.manuf.sched: Reliable schedules;
  .rel.manuf.inv: Well-defined inventories.

.rel.his: HIS want (according to PaulH):
  .rel.his.global: Harlequin to be able to work in a globally distributed way;
  .rel.his.plat: Harlequin to be able to work in a multi-platform environment;
  .rel.his.right: Harlequin to have the "right" processes -- that is, to have 
(quality) process that meets requirements;
  .rel.his.import: The MM Group to be willing to import process changes from 
outside the group;
  .rel.his.export: The MM group to consider the wider applicability (within 
Harlequin) of any process change.

.rel.legal: Legal want ???.

