                 MINUTES OF PROCESS MEETING 1997-03-19
                       meeting.general.1997-03-19
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-03-20

INTRODUCTION

.background: The process brainstorm of edit.1997-03-19 caused Richard Brooksby 
<Richard> and Gavin Matthews <GavinM> to continue a discussion of process, by 
telephone, in 27 Portugal Place, and in 7A Jesus Lane.


GOALS

.goal.quality: 1. To ensure delivery of quality products. I.e. meeting 
requirements of:
  - functionality
  - reliability
  - performance
  - usability
  - timeliness
  - costs
All these are about doing the right thing on time within budget.

.goal.prof: 2. To advance the professional development of those who use it.

.goal.nice: 3. To make product development enjoyable and rewarding.


REQUIREMENTS

.req.clear: 1. The process must be clear to everyone who must use it 
(.goal.nice, .goal.quality).

.req.trust: 2. Users of the process must believe in it and trust it 
(.goal.quality, .goal.nice)

.req.time: 3. The process must cope with situations of pressure of time.  It 
must work when resources are limited (.goal.quality).

.req.product: 4. Products produced must meet their requirements (.goal.quality).

.req.effort: The process must be developed and maintained using 0.5 person 
full-time, with support from the rest of the group.

Too many documents
Too much to do
Too little time
Symptoms of failure


PARTS OF THE PROCESS PRODUCT

.parts: 
Goals and Requirements Determination
Solution Specification
Impact Estimation
Design Decision Making
Planning
Evolution
Feedback
Inspection
Process Training and Reinforcement -- Periodic review of process, e.g. style 
guide
Process Planning -- Easily make time for same


IDEAS

.idea.quarter: Quarterly planning (one-week) producing product plans.  Plans 
are maintained by update at the end, then consolidated into a new plan next 
quarter.


PLAN

.plan: Page numbers are in book.humphrey89

-1. Plan.  Outline plan.  Design.  WBS.  Estimate.  Scheduling.  Go

0. Initial - Identify current process
  - Consolidate existing process
  - Establish baseline
  - _Identify_ process so it can be improved
  - Don't try to change it
  - Describe what actually happens.  be frank.

1. Repeatable - Basic management control
  - Commitment discipline (p69)
  - Management system (p72)
     o Plans (Plan should include plan/project review dates)
     o Quarterly review against plan -> feedback (p75)
     o Goals, Objectives (p87)
     o Work Breakdown (p89)
     o Size estimate
     o Resource estimates
     o Schedule
     o Tracking
  - Configuration management (fig 7.2) (combination of DARWIN and HOPE)
     o Identify product parts (p114) e.g. MPS, MPS/Tracer etc, Doc, etc, -- 
Process has parts too! (Management, Config, etc.)
     o Config control (p116)
     o Versions 
     o Baselines (p122)
     o Owners (p129)
     o Change control board (p129)
  - QA
     o Definition of responsibilities and functions
     o Reporting (p142)
     o Plan (QA) (p147)
     o Independent Verification (testing) (Narrow definition of QA) (p151)
  - PSP 0.1
     o Individual training & support (PSP)
     o Design for changes
  - Process maintenance

1.1 Commitment discipline
  - Commitment to acheive a task -- e.g. edit, RFC, etc.
  - Personal time management 
  - Policy on commitment
  - Buy-in from team
  - Procedure for negotiating commitment 
    e.g. mail request; mail confirmation of commitment
    e.g. RFC goes out, everyone must respond with commitment
    Mail must contain information only or a request for an action or a decision
  - Communications
  - Planning before commitment
    SMART: Specific measurable reasonable assignable time-oriented
  - Bill of rights (Gilb)

0.1 Consolidate/Identify
  - Inventory of process documents with status -- include self
    Where are we?  What have we got?

0.2 Establish baseline
  - What's minimum effort to get something reasonably consistent and usable, 
meeting as many reqs as possible (Process doc).

0.3 Identify Actual
  - Want something complete -- sweeping generalizations
  - Establish document for all areas we plan for.  e.g. config-mgmt, 
inspection, defect-prevention, etc.
  - Put brief overviews and placeholders based on what we do now, e.g. "At 
present we have no quarterly project review"
  - All topics in book.humphrey89
  - Get complete baseline in all areas that concern us
Should do this for product too!


BOOTING PLANNING

1. Plan next hour, stick to it, look back  at the end
2. Plan next morning/afternoon
3. Plan next dat
4. Plan next week
5. Plan next month
  etc.

Focus on achievement, not activity.


DOCUMENT MAINTENANCE

Gate - analyse how document rots
Maint - scheduled review of documents (expiry dates)

Make sure product design is explicitly RFC'd.

Owner/Expiry

Change Log


PROCESS PRODUCT DESIGN

- Documenting process is not doing it 
  "A document which, if used, would fix it."

- Creating more documents.  Boiled frog principle.
  When do we stop creating documents?
  When do we outdate old documents?
  How many documents is OK?


MAINTENANCE

Ownership
  Every document belongs to a project - the work which produces a product
                                      - manager is responsible by default
  Every document belongs to a person who is responsible for its maintenance
Expiry dates
Gates


ARCHITECTURE

Virtual/Real handbook
Identifiable entity with version (to permit improvement)
Set of InfiSys documents -- identify, print, bind in folder, cover, separators
Vindication of guide.text!  (Rationale thereof.)


PROCESS PRODUCT DESCRIPTION

Configuration Management

Darwin process description -- process.darwin -- incomplete -- 3 man-hours
  Delete much of this text.  COpy and edit meeting (with Dave Pigott)  Add 
diagram (flow chart).  Call that draft 0

Darwin procedures -- proc.request, etc -- 12 man-hours
  Finish.  Tidy up.

HOPE procedures -- proc.dev.branch -- 0.5 man-hours
  Check.


Development

Development process -- process.develop -- incomplete -- 3 man-hours
  Delete most of it.  Write brief overview with diagram.  (Do together)

Guides for implementation -- guide.impl.c.* -- 4 man-hours
  Correct or delete parts.  Don't try to complete.


Inspection

Review process -- process.review -- incomplete -- 2 man-hours
  Cut down.  Update diagram.  A bit of justification

Review procedure -- proc.review -- 6 man-hours
  Split up (1 page each) Tidy

Editing guide -- guide.edit 

Procedure for editing -- proc.review.edit


InfoSys

Document Types, Statuses -- 2 man-hours
  Include relevant ones.

Design, overview, etc. -- 6 man-hours
  Consolidate into single doc?

guide.text

guide.tag


Process

Contents/Inventory with statuses

Overview?

Release notes


More Inspection (actually general)

Rules

Checklists


Miscellaneous

Bibliography -- guide.bib

Dates -- guide.date


PROCESS PLAN OUTLINE

  INTRO
  PURPOSE
  SCOPE etc

  Idea is to implement the levels of the CMM (ref) as releases of version of a 
"process product" in accordance with evo.

  project.process

  OVERVIEW OF CMM PHASES/LEVELS

  1.5 Baseline
  2. Repeatable
  3. Defined
  4. Managed
  5. Optimizing

  refs to Hunphrey and URLs

  OUTLINE OF VERSIONS

  Corresponds to CMM levels

  1. Baseline
    Existing process as of April 1997
  2. etc.


  DETAILED PLAN

  1. Baseline
    Consolidate/Identify etc.
    Details of documents and work to be done.


GAVIN'S RANDOM THOUGHTS

Expiry for all documents.  Set one year in advance?  Who is owner?  Remove 
obsolete documents from view.  How to "enforce"?

Placeholder status.

"Improvement as document" fallacy -- I can't make all improvements by writing 
another document.

"Equating documenting process with doing it" fallacy -- must be means of using 
documents.

Remember to talk to AndrewS about DARWIN.

Experiment document type.  Experimental process should be better documented.  
Have new document type which outlines the variation, the background, the 
metrics, and the result.  Suitable for other products.

Process brainstorm conflicts with the concept of process requests identifying 
the problem rather than the solution.  The defect is the problem (in some 
sense) -- the brainstorm is some analysis/suggestion.


EFFORT

.effort: The meeting took two people four hours.  The write-up took 1.5 hours.  
Total 9.5 man-hours.

