               L2: SOFTWARE PROJECT TRACKING & OVERSIGHT
                                kpa.spt
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Software Project 
Tracking and Oversight, a key area of Level 2 of the Capability Maturity Model, 
as described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Software Project Tracking and Oversight is to provide 
adequate visibility into actual progress so that management can take effective 
actions when the software project's performance deviates significantly from the 
software plans.

Software Project Tracking and Oversight involves tracking and reviewing the 
software accomplishments and results against documented estimates, commitments, 
and plans, and adjusting these plans based on the actual accomplishments and 
results.

A documented plan for the software project (i.e., the software development 
plan, as described in the Software Project Planning key process area) is used 
as the basis for tracking the software activities, communicating status, and 
revising plans. Software activities are monitored by the management. Progress 
is primarily determined by comparing the actual software size, effort, cost, 
and schedule to the plan when selected software work products are completed and 
at selected milestones. When it is determined that the software project's plans 
are not being met, corrective actions are taken. These actions may include 
revising the software development plan to reflect the actual accomplishments 
and replanning the remaining work or taking actions to improve the performance.


GOALS

.goal.track: Actual results and performances are tracked against the software 
plans.

.goal.correct: Corrective actions are taken and managed to closure when actual 
results and performance deviate significantly from the software plans.

.goal.agree: Changes to software commitments are agreed to by the affected 
groups and individuals.

