                ALLOCATION CHART SHOWING SIZE AND SOURCE
                      design.product.tool.allocsrc
                           incomplete design
                            sheep 1997-06-11


INTRODUCTION:

This document is intended as a way of thinking about possible ways that the 
tool might present information. The drawings are intended to be indicative of 
how the view might look in a window.


OVERVIEW:

This view shows a table showing either type or allocation point. The top of the 
table is the object which has the most number of allocations. The list is 
sorted by number of allocations (scrolling if nessasry). 



Inspired by Highlights from NHC - s space-efficent Haskal compiler by Niklas 
Rojmo. 

.interaction. 

Double clicking on a bar should lead too opening up the source code for the 
allocation. Another possible option is to jump to the source for the type or 
class for the object. 

Selecting a bar should permit the user to associate a colour with that 
allocation point. This change should filter out into the other views. Naturally 
if the allocation was already coloured (from the source for example ) then it 
would display the bar in that colour. 


.Options. 

This table could be labelled from either allocation point (where in the source 
code the thing was allocated)  or by type. In the case of type the file 
containing the type/class definition should be opened.

The table could be sorted either by size * number of allocations or just number 
of allocations. 

The table might also merge seperate allocations of similar sizes into the same 
table position. This might form an alternative view to help the user and 
program decide on the top 4 allocations and then implement a custom allocator 
for fast allocations. 





TESTING:

One way of testing these diagrams is to ask your self if the function of the 
chart was immediately obvious after looking at the diagram ? Could you think of 
a use for the view might you find this view useful. If you think of ways of 
improving the chart and adding more elements too it them again it might be more 
useful than one you cannot think of adding too.


ATTACHMENT:

   "SIZETA~1.VSD"


