                  L4: QUANTITATIVE PROCESS MANAGEMENT
                                kpa.qpm
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Quantitative Process 
Management, a key area of Level 4 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Quantitative Process Management is to control the 
process performance of the software project quantitativly.  Software process 
performance represents the actual results achieved from following a software 
process.

Quantitative Process Management involves establishing goals for the performance 
of the project's defined software process, which is described in the Integrated 
Software Management key process area, taking measurements of the process 
performance, analyzing these measurements, and making adjustments to maintain 
process performance within acceptable limits. When the process performance is 
stabilized within acceptable limits, the project's defined software process, 
the associated measurements, and the acceptable limits for the measurements are 
established as a baseline and used to control process performance 
quantitatively.

The organization collects process performance data from the software projects 
and uses these data to characterize the process capability (i.e., the process 
performance a new project can expect to attain) of the organization's standard 
software process, which is described in the Organization Process Definition key 
process area. Process capability describes the range of expected results from 
following a software process (i.e., the most likely outcomes that are expected 
from the next software project the organization undertakes). These process 
capability data are, in turn, used by the software projects to establish and 
revise their process performance goals and to analyze the performance of the 
projects' defined software processes.


GOALS

.goal.plan: The quantitative process management activities are planned.

.goal.perf: The process performance of the project's defined software process 
is controlled quantitatively.

.goal.cap: The process capability of the organization's standard software 
process is known in quantitative terms.

