                  L3: ORGANIZATION PROCESS DEFINITION
                                kpa.opd
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Organization Process 
Definition, a key area of Level 3 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Organization Process Definition is to develop and 
maintain a usable set of software proces assets that improve process 
performance across the projects and provide a basis for cumulative, long-term 
benefits to the organization.

Organization Process Definition involves developing and maintaining the 
organization's standard software process, along with related process assets, 
such as descriptions of software life cycles, process tailoring guidelines and 
criteria, the organization's software process database, and a library of 
software process-related documentation.

These assets may be collected in many ways, depending on the organization's 
implementation of Organization Process Definition. For example, the 
descriptions of the software life cycles may be an integral part of the 
organization's standard software process or parts of the library of software 
process-related documentation may be stored in the organization's software 
process database.

The organization's software process assets are available for use in developing, 
implementing, and maintaining the projects' defined software processes. (The 
practices related to the development and maintenance of the project's defined 
software process are described in the Integrated Software Management key 
process area.)


GOALS

.goal.dev: A standard software process for the organization is developed and 
maintained.

.goal.info: Information related to the use of the organization's standard 
software process by the software projects is collected, reviewed, and made 
available.

