                        THE "REQ" DOCUMENT TYPE
                                type.req
                            incomplete type
                            pekka 2000-06-28

Rules: rule.universal

Tag template: req.<project>


Tagging:

Requirements are tagged req.<project>.  If a requirements document grows too 
large, it may be split, and the parts tagged req.<project>.*; The parts are 
held to constitute a single entity with a single history, and a req.<project> 
document must be retained, to hold the edit history and other general material.


Purpose:

The "req" document type contains formal requirements (and counter-requirements) 
for a project.


Content:

A requirements document should describe in a clear, concise, consistent, and 
unambiguous manner all significant requirements on the project.  
.scope.sufficient: The document should contain enough information for the 
Memory Management group to produce results that will satisfy the project goals 
as expressed in goal.<project>.

.scope.comms: The requirements will also serve as a medium for communication 
and negotiation between the MM group and its clients.


Conventions

.conv.req: Each requirement is tagged, and the following three lines contain a 
description, category, and source reference respectively.  Source references 
are in decreasing order of relevance.  Most descriptions are implicitly 
prefixed with "The Memory Manager shall...".

.conv.req.cat: Categories are used to determine priorities for work in 
planning, especially in contingency planning.  The categories are:

  critical: The requirement is critical to the project.  If the requirement
            is not met, the project can be said to have failed.

  essential: The requirement is essential and may not be omitted without
             renegotiating the requirements.

  optional: The requirement will be met if at all possible, but failure to
            meet it does not cause the project to fail.

  nice: Meeting the requirements is recognised as a "good thing" and will
        be attempted if the cost is low.

  unknown: The category of the requirement is unknown and needs to be resolved.


Procedures:

guide.text;proc.text.template

