                    L5: TECHNOLOGY CHANGE MANAGEMENT
                                kpa.tcm
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Technology Change 
Management, a key area of Level 5 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Technology Change Management is to identify new 
technologies (i.e., tools, methods, and processes) and track them into the 
organization in an orderly manner.

Technology Change Management involves identifying, selecting, and evaluating 
new technologies, and incorporating effective technologies into the 
organization. The objective is to improve software quality, increase 
productivity, and decrease the cycle time for product development.

The organization establishes a group (such as a software engineering process 
group or a technology support group) that works with the software projects to 
introduce and evaluate new technologies and manage changes to existing 
technologies. Particular emphasis is placed on technology changes that are 
likely to improve the capability of the organization's standard software 
process (as described in the Organization Process Definition key process area).

By maintaining an awareness of software-related technology innovations and 
systematically evaluating and experimenting with them, the organization selects 
appropriate technologies to improve the quality of its software and the 
productivity of its software activities. Pilot efforts are performed to assess 
new and unproven technologies before they are incorporated into normal 
practice. With appropriate sponsorship of the organization's management, the 
selected technologies are incorporated into the organization's standard 
software process and current projects, as appropriate.

Changes to the organization's standard software process (as described in the 
Organization Process Definition key process area) and the projects' defined 
software processes (as described in the Integrated Software Management key 
process area) resulting from these technology changes are handled as described 
in the Process Change Management key process area.


GOALS

.goal.plan: Incorporation of technology changes are planned.

.goal.eval: New technologies are evaluated to determine their effect on quality 
and productivity.

.goal.transfer: Appropriate new technologies are transferred into normal 
practice across the organization.

