     EMPIRICAL MEASUREMENTS OF SIX ALLOCATION-INTENSIVE C PROGRAMS
                      Benjamin Zorn;Dirk Grunwald
               Department of Computer Science, University
          of Colorado at Boulder, CO 80309-0430 USA, 01/07/92
                     Technical Report CU-CS-604-92
    ftp://ftp.cs.colorado.edu/pub/techreports/zorn/CU-CS-604-92.ps.Z

                             paper.zorn92b
                                 draft
                           richard 1995-08-03


ABSTRACT:

Dynamic memory management is an important part of a large class of computer 
programs and high-performance algorithms for dynamic memory management have 
been, and will continue to be, of considerable interest.  This paper presents 
empirical data from a collection of six allocation-intensive C programs. 
Extensive statistics about the allocation behavior of the programs measured, 
including the distributions of object sizes, lifetimes, and interarrival times, 
are presented.  This data is valuable for the following reasons: first, the 
data from these programs can be used to design high-performance algorithms for 
dynamic memory management.  Second, these programs can be used as a benchmark 
test suite for evaluating and comparing the performance of different dynamic 
memory management algorithms.  Finally, the data presented gives readers 
greater insight into the storage allocation patterns of a broad range of 
programs.  The data presented in this paper is an abbreviated version of more 
extensive statistics that are publicly available on the internet.

REVIEWS:

The following paragraph is the summary of the paper, which includes information 
about where to get the statistics mentioned in the abstract.

We have presented data from one input data set for each of the six programs 
measured. Using the trace extraction and reduction techniques described, we 
have collected similar data from at least two inputs to each of these programs. 
We have also collected other statistical characterizations of the test programs 
and compared the accuracy of different synthetic models of program allocation 
in a companion paper [14]. All of the collected data has been formated as a C 
program input file with declarations of the distributions of object size, 
holding time, etc. These C files can easily be compiled and linked with a 
program intended to manipulate the data. C files representing all inputs to all 
the programs described in this paper are publically available via anonymous FTP 
from ftp.cs.colorado.edu in the directory pub/cs/misc/MallocStudy. The 
compressed C files are labeled cfrac-1,2,3.c.Z, etc. where each number 
represents a different input. In addition, a header file "DataHeader.h" is 
included that declares all the data structures defined in the .c files. Please 
feel free to use the data provided in this directory but we would appreciate 
your sending us e-mail (fzorn,grunwaldg@cs.colorado.edu) indicating that you 
intend to use the data and how you intend to use it.

ATTACHMENT
   "Zorn92b.ps"

