                      PROPOSED LICENSING STRATEGY
                             idea.licensing
                            incomplete idea
                            nick 1997-05-29

.intro This is the mail sent to Geroge and legal on 1997-05-14, modified in the 
light of conversation with George  on 1997-05-29.

.outstanding There are a few outstanding issues here
.outstanding.legal Legal have not responded yet
.outstanding.pricing  Pricing should be in the $100-200 mark, otherwise George 
reserves the right to review the strategy
.outstanding.impl Geroge was concerned about how one could possibly implement 
the nagware strategy. I claimed this was open to technical solution, which 
avoided me having to justify it further but still leaves open the question of 
what the solution would be!

.guts
Broadly, the product will comprise: 

* runtime libraries to allow users (ie application writers) to
optimize various aspects of Memory Management in their applications

* analysis tools to complement the runtime libraries and assist in
tuning the libraries

* supporting documentation etc.


The product's requirements include an immediate "return on
investment": a novice user of AMM must be able to discern a clear
advantage to using this software, after less than half-a-day's trial
use. 


This requirement will be met by structuring the product into a series
of levels of complexity. Both the runtime libraries and analysis tools
will operate on the same set of levels in parallel. The simplest (or
"dropin") level will serve as the evaluation arena for both libraries
and tools.


Requirements on licensing strategy:

* No runtime royalty on linked libraries.

* Analysis tools to be licensed, similar to other Hqn development
products. 

* Evaluators should get far enough to appreciate the product without
gaining commercial advantage before they've purchased.


Proposed strategy for controlling libraries:

* Audit trail - user is given activation key, which is buried in
libraries and leaves us an audit trail. We can let the fact of this be
known - it may be enough to scare off unauthorised redistribution.

* Evaluation restricted - the activation key for evaluators permits
use only of the dropin libraries and some subset of the analysis tools,
and nothing more sophisticated.

* Evaluation nagware - activation key for evaluation is different. In
"evaluation" mode, every invocation of user's end product (their
application) starts with a large splash screen which (i) announces
Harlequin and (ii) warns about legal consequences of redistributing
evaluation software. This leaves MM-driven application fully
functional (for evaluation purposes) but not commercially
redistributable. [Alternative to that - user has to type an activation
code for every run of evaluation software. Requirement is to prevent
commercial distribution.]



