                     L2: SOFTWARE QUALITY ASSURANCE
                                kpa.sqa
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area   of Software Quality 
Assurance, a key area of Level 2 of the Capability Maturity Model, as described 
in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Software Quality Assurance is to provide management 
with appropriate visibility into the process being used by the software project 
and of the products being built.

Software Quality Assurance involves reviewing and auditing the software 
products and activities to verify that they comply with the applicable 
procedures and standards and providing the software project and other 
appropriate managers with the results of these reviews and audits.

The software quality assurance group works with the software project during its 
early stages to establish plans, standards, and procedures that will add value 
to the software project and satisfy the constraints of the project and the 
organization's policies. By participating in establishing the plans, standards, 
and procedures, the software quality assurance group helps ensure they fit the 
project's needs and verifies that they will be usable for performing reviews 
and audits throughout the software life cycle. The software quality assurance 
group reviews project activities and audits software work products throughout 
the life cycle and provides management with visibility as to whether the 
software project is adhering to its established plans, standards, and 
procedures.

Compliance issues are first addressed within the software project and resolved 
there if possible. For issues not resolvable within the software project, the 
software quality assurance group escalates the issue to an appropriate level of 
management for resolution.

This key process area covers the practices for the group performing the 
software quality assurance function. The practices identifying the specific 
activities and work products that the software quality assurance group reviews 
and/or audits are generally contained in the Verifying Implementation common 
feature of the other key process areas.


GOALS

.goal.plan: Software quality assurance activities are planned.

.goal.verify: Adherence of software products and activities to the applicable 
standards, procedures, and requirements is verified objectively.

.goal.inform: Affected groups and individuals are informed of software quality 
assurance activities and results.

.goal.senior: Noncompliance issues that cannot be resolved within the software 
project are addressed by senior management.

