                DESIGN OF KEYWORDS ON INFOSYS DOCUMENTS
                        design.infosys.keywords
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-06

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document applies explicitly to all documents in MM Information and 
implicity to other documents in the Information System.

.readership: This document is intended for all users of the MM Information 
System.

.hist.0: 1997-06-06  GavinM  Created in response to request.process.170405.


KEYWORDS

Status

.status: The status values are fully documented in status.*[Notes4-specific 
link].  This document summarise the rough flow between statuses.

.status.temporary: A document might start in temporary if its tag was likely to 
change.  No-one may make any reliance on a temporary document.  See 
status.temporary.

.status.incomplete: Documents that are not ready for use are incomplete.  Other 
may rely on the tag of an incomplete document, but not its internal tags.  See 
status.incomplete.

.status.draft: When a document is complete and ready for general use, 
especially if it is being offered for review, it is draft.  Others may rely on 
it.  There should only be one draft version of a document for each revision 
number.  When editing a draft document, it is normal to increment the revision 
and set the status initially to incomplete.  See status.draft.

.status.accepted: When a document has successfully exited review, it becomes 
accepted.  The same rules for modification apply as for draft documents.  See 
status.accepted.

.status.obsolete: When a document is no longer to be used at all, its status 
becomes obsolete.  Obsolete documents may be omited from MM Information views.  
See status.obsolete.


Type

.type: Document types are fully documented in type.* [Notes4-specific link].  
Many of them are associated with forms, but some are not.  The type of a 
document is weakly related to its first tag element.


.build: The following types relate to the build system:
  .arch: Processor Architecture:  See type.arch
  .builder: Build Environment:  See type.builder
  .os: Operating System: See type.os
  .platform: Target Platform:  See type.platform
  .variety: Target Variety:  See type.variety

.process: The following types relate to process:
  .check: Checklist:  See type.check
  .guide: Guidelines: See type.guide
  .proc: Procedures: See type.proc
  .process: Process: See type.process
  .role: Development Roles: See type.role
  .rule: Rule Sets: See type.rule

.infosys: The following types relate to infosys types:
  .person: Person: See .person and type.person
  .status: Document Status: See .status and type.status
  .type: Document Type: See .type and type.type

.other: Other types:
  .bib: Bibliography Entry: See type.bib
  .design: Design: See type.design
  .doc: General Document: See type.doc
  .goal: Goal Set: See type.goal
  .idea: Solution Idea: See type.idea
  .impl: Implementation: See type.impl
  .overview: Overview: See type.overview
  .quote: Quoted Material: See type.quote
  .review: Review Record: See type.review
  .symbol: Interface Symbol Documentation: See type.symbol


Person

.person: Anyone who may be referred to in MM Information (say by creating or 
editing documents) should have a person.<username> record.  The username should 
be the Unix username.  See type.person for more details.

