    SUMMARY OF FIRST AND SECOND MM/LFCS MEETINGS, 1995-04-18 AND 19
                        meeting.lfcs.1995-04-18
                               draft doc
                           richard 1995-07-31

INTRODUCTION

David Jones and Richard Brooksby met John Longley on Tuesday 18th April,
and Healf Goguen on Wednesday 19th at Barrington Hall in Cambridge.  (We
didn't intend to split the meeting like this -- it was an accident which
proved useful.)


TUESDAY (John)

We discussed the papers, and the ideas that John had written down for an
abstract framework.  We made quite a lot of progress which will be fed back
in to John's document.  I look forward to seeing the next draft.  John also
signed a non-disclosure agreement with Harlequin which allows us to share
more information about the detailed workings of the Memory Management
System, especially some of the radical new ideas we want to be able to
reason about.


WEDNESDAY (Healf)

We briefly covered John's framework, then talked about ways in which we
might practically apply Lego to real Memory Management problems using such
a framework.  We came up with a new model which appears powerful enough to
describe the memory management algorithms but is mathematically quite
tractable.  Since Healf's position is not yet entirely clear, he didn't
sign a non-disclosure agreement, and we didn't discuss the details of the
Memory Management System implementation.


GOALS

During our meetings we discussed what our project and personal goals were
for the collaboration.  Here's what we came up with:

1. Suggest ways in which the Memory Management Project might better meet
its requirements.

2. Clarify understanding of the Memory Management System.

3. Improve communication within the Memory Management Project.

4. Provide suggestions for improving the Memory Manager by the application
of formal techniques.

5. Improve communication between Harlequin and LFCS.

6. Provide a viable starting point for verification of the Memory
Management system.

7. Demonstrate the usefulness of formal techniques, especially
type-theoretic approaches.

8. Publish academic papers to advance John and Healf's academic careers,
and to improve the standing of LFCS and the image of Harlequin.

9. Improve Healf's knowledge of practical software engineering and
practical applications of formal techniques.

10. Provide feedback to the design of Lego and other theorem-proving systems.

11. Satisfy our intellectual curiosity.

I invite Rod to comment on these and perhaps suggest adjustments to
emphasis, if appropriate.


ACTIONS

- We intend to meet again in mid-May, in Edinburgh.  We agreed on Friday
19th May with John, but it turns out that Healf can't make it then.  Would
Monday 16th May be convenient for all parties?

- John, we would like to get in touch as soon as possible to describe the
"new model" we worked out when Healf was here.  I'm sure you'll like it.
Please let us know when you're available.

- Healf, let us know if and when your position at LFCS is definite.

- Further discussion by e-mail is invited.

