                           THE REVIEW PROCESS
                             process.review
                               draft doc
                           richard 1995-08-18

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document describes the review process, which is largely derived 
from Gilb's "Inspections" (See Gilb & Graham "Software Inspection", ie 
book.gilb93).  [This document does not describe the review process.  It 
describes some of its elements - roles and documents.  Almost none of the 
dynamic is captured, except in a cryptic diagram.  drj 1998-12-08]

.background: Details of the prcedures for review may be found in proc.review.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in MM-style review, 
either within the MM Group, or outside it.

.source: See also book.gilb93.handbook.


GOALS

.goal.fix: The immediate goal of review is to identify and correct major 
defects (see guide.review.class.major).

.goal.prevent: A more important, but more long-term, goal of review is to 
identify and remove the causes of defects.


OVERVIEW

.over: Review is a process whereby people developing documents of any sort can 
seek the assistance of their peers in:
  - Evaluating the quality of a produced document;
  - Finding defects in produced documents;
  - Fixing the development process involved in producing documents.

In return for this assistance, the developer (but see .role.editor) agrees to:
  - Take written action on all issues raised;
  - Answer in writing all questions asked.

.fig.over: This diagram shows how the various documents, roles, and procedures 
relate.

[ This diagram needs revision.  It should mention roles involved.  I have ideas 
on paper.  GavinM 1997-06-12 ]
[ Need some text describing workflow of diagram.  GavinM 1997-06-13 ]


ROLES

.role.author: The Author is the person primarily responsible for the production 
of the product document (see .doc.product).

.role.leader: The Leader is the person responsible for organizing and planning 
review.  He need not be distinct from the Author.  It is helpful if the Leader 
has received special instruction in review or inspection.

.role.editor: The Editor is the person responsible for acting on issues raised, 
and bringing the product document to exit.  He is usually the Author.

.role.scribe: The Scribe is the person who records information during review 
meetings.  He is usually the Leader.

.role.checker: A Checker is any person who participates in the checking of 
product documents, and process brainstorming.  All review attendees are usually 
Checkers, including the roles above.  Checkers may be asked by the Leader to 
check with certain checking roles in mind; this is to increase coverage and 
reduce duplication of issues.


DOCUMENTS

.doc: The review process involves a lot of documents.  This is a brief 
explanation of what they are:
  .doc.source: Source document: A document from which the Product document is 
derived.  Note that this is nothing to do with source code.
  .doc.product: Product document: The document developed from the source 
documents, and offered for review.
  .doc.record: Review record: A document of type "review" that records the 
results of reviewing one document.  This includes the issue log, and the 
barinstormed improvement suggestions. 
  .doc.issue: Issue log: A record of issues raised during the logging meeting, 
specifying their location, type, finder, and a brief description.  The issue 
log also gives each issue an identifying number.
  .doc.rev: Revised document: The result of performing the edit procedure on 
the Product document.
  .doc.acc: Accepted document: The result of a Revised document passing exit.
  .doc.rule: Rule: A rule set that a Product document is expected to obey.
  .doc.guide: Guidelines: A "guide" document that a Product document may be 
expected to be in line with.
  .doc.check: Checklist: A list of questions, a negative answer to which 
indictes that a rule has been broken (see .doc.rule).
  .doc.entry: Entry criteria: Criteria that should be met before review to 
ensure that the document is likely to pass exit.
  .doc.proc: Procedures: Descriptions of the steps involved in completing any 
part of process (development, review, or otherwise).
  .doc.imp: Brainstormed improvement suggestions: Suggested improvements to 
process (and hence to some document) arising from the process brainstorm.   
  .doc.request: Requests for change: An issue that the editor cannot deal with 
that is escalated to some other tracking system, usually MM Evolution (see 
process.darwin).


REVIEW PROCEDURES AND GUIDES

.proc: Documents for review are produced by some development process; that is 
outside the scope of this document, but it involves the development of a 
product document from source documents in order to meet some requirements.  
Once development is complete, the procedures outlined in proc.review are 
executed.

.guide: There are also several guide documents relating to review:
  - guide.review.edit -- Guide to recording issue resolution during edit;
  - guide.review.class -- Guide to classification of issues in checking and 
logging.

