                            UNIVERSAL RULES
                             rule.universal
                             accepted rule
                           richard 1995-08-07

Scope: This rule set applies to _all_ documents (see design.infosys), be they 
requirements, ideas, design, implementation source code, or user 
documentation.  It also apply to themselves.  It can be used by anyone for 
review of any document.


.head: The document must be clearly marked with (see design.infosys):
  .head.tag: its tag;
  .head.rev: the revision number (starting at 0);
  .head.type: document type;
  .head.status: document status [assume "draft" if unmarked];
  .head.title: title;
  .head.creator: creator; 
  .head.time: creation time.

.readership: The intended "readership" of a document must be clear to anyone.

.purpose: The purpose of the document must be clear to the readership.  The 
purpose must be stated explicitly if it can't easily be derived in a defined 
way.

.clear: The meaning of the document must be crystal clear and unambiguous to 
the readership.

.simple: The document must be as simple as possible for its purpose.  ["Simple" 
often implies "brief" but not always.  Don't confuse terseness with simplicity.]

.complete: The document must be complete for its purpose, unless indicated 
otherwise.

.cons: The document must be consistent with:
  .cons.other: other documentation which is accepted;
  .cons.guide: any relevent guidelines, e.g. format, spelling, grammar, 
punctuation;
  .cons.self: itself;
  .cons.purpose: its purpose.

.element: Statements should be broken up into their most elementary form.

.tag: Tag each elementary statement with a unique name, according to guide.tag.

.once: Make each statement once, and thereafter refer to it using its tag.  
Comments may be used to paraphrase elsewhere.

.note: Mark comments, notes, suggestions, or ideas which are not part of the 
document clearly, using the accepted convention for the type of document.  [For 
text documents, this is by enclosing in square brackets (see 
guide.text.comment).]

.risk: Indicate known or suspected risk clearly using a comment. [Suggest 
.risk.* as tag]

.change: For any change to a document, it must be possible to retract the 
change, and determine the date, author, and substance of the change.  [HOPE and 
Notes keep version histories.]

