                        THE "DOC" DOCUMENT TYPE
                                type.doc
                            incomplete type
                           richard 1995-08-09

Rules: rule.universal

Tag template: <tag>


Tagging:

Since "doc" is the catch-all type, there is no defined scheme for tagging.  
When a document is created because there is no appropriate form in a particular 
area of the system, use the scheme for the documents around it.  For example, 
information which supplements a bibliography entry could be tagged 
"book.gilb93.appendix".  Choose a tag which describes the _thing_ itself, and 
is therefore a noun.


Purpose:

Type "doc" is the most general type.  The form is simply the common information 
header described above, plus a text document.  This type is used where there is 
not a more specific type defined.  The presence of documents of type "doc" in 
the system indicates that perhaps there should be some more types defined.


Content:

All documents have certain bits of information stored: Tag, Revision, Status, 
Type, Title, Creator, and CreationTime.

  Tag: The unique hierarchical identifier for the document.  Tags should be made
       up of the characters A-Z, a-z, 0-9, and hyphen, with elements separated
       by dots (periods).  The case of characters in a tag is not significant.
       Tags will be canonically stored as lower case.  Each document type will
       define how to choose the tag for that document.
         In general, the tag is the name of the object that is tagged, and it
       is therefore a "noun phrase" in some sense.  For example, a bibliography
       entry for a book is tagged "book.xxxyy" and not "bib.xxxyy".

  Revision: A revision number for the document.  When the doc is modified, the
            revision number should be increased by one.  A tag may be qualified
            with a revision number (e.g. "process.rights(3)") to indicate which
            particular version of the document is meant.  Usually, revisions are
            increased when an "accepted" (reviewed) document is modified.  The
            new revision becomes "draft" until it is reviewed.

  Status: This is the stage of processing of the doc, indicating its progress
          within the project.  See "status.*" for information about the meaning
          of each status code.

  Type: The generic type is "doc", since all documents are "docs".  Each
        document type has a "form" which determines the information stored
        in the document and how it is formatted.  Documents of type "doc" have
        the most general document form -- free text.  Where approrpriate, there
        are more specific forms for other types which attempt to make the
        information more regular and assist its processing.  For example,
        bibliography entries are in a particular format, and include author
        information.  The Lotus Notes implementation implements forms directly,
        but they are basically plain text templates.

  Title: The title is a short description of the document in English.  The tag
         should be enough information for the initiated to figure out what
         something is.  The title should provide enough information for the
         uninitiated, for example, a visitor from another project looking at
         the system.

  Creator: The creator is the person (or people) who created the document. If
           the thing is being copied from elsewhere (for example, a pre-existing
           document or mail message) then it should be the person who created
           the information in the first place.  When a document is revised,
           the person or people who revise it become the creators of a new
           revision of that document.

  CreationTime: The time at which the thing was created.  Usually this is the
                thing is entered into the system.  If it's being copied from
                elsewhere, try to use the original date that the information
                was created.  When a document is revised, a new revision is
                created, and therefore the creation time is the time of the
                revision.

The common fields are always written at the top of a document in a particular 
way, as shown below.
---
<Tag>(<Revision>)  <status> <type>
<blank line>
                          <Upper case title>
                    <Creator>, <Creation date (ISO)>
<blank line>
<blank line>
---
For example:
---
paper.wil95(1)  draft bib

        DYNAMIC STORAGE ALLOCATION: A SURVEY AND CRITICAL REVIEW
                      Richard Brooksby, 1995-08-03


---



Procedures:

guide.text;proc.text.template

