              NOTES FROM THE MM/DYLAN MEETING, 1994-05-13
                        meeting.dylan.1994-05-13
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-10-07

Purpose:        To investigate the possibilities for cooperation between the
                Dylan and Memory Management projects.

Present:        richard, mikes, tony

Location:       Barrington Hall
Date:           1994-05-13 10:00

Agenda:         1. Overview of goals and plans.
                2. Dylan's requirements for memory managers:
                     - technical requirements
                     - current provisions
                     - planning requirements
                3. Possible strategies.
                4. Actions.


1. OVERVIEW OF GOALS AND PLANS

                                Dylan

  Apple release Dylan at the end of 1995 for Macintosh.

  Goals:
    - build Dylan compiler and development env for profit
    - support use of Dylan in house for Applications

  Critical attributes:
    - small footprint executables               [how small?]
    - component-based software                  [define?]
    - portable: new platforms 1 month each
    [you need more of these]

  Milestones: 
    - file compiler at end of May
    - release Dylan for NT/Chicago/Win32s mid 1995
    - port to other platforms during 1995


                          Memory Management

  Goals:
    - productize MM expertise for profit
    [no others made clear]

  Critical attributes:
    none clearly defined
    [resourcing?]
    [timescale?]
    [market penetration?]
    [reputation?]
    [software quality?]
    [maintenance cost?]
    [rework cost?]
    [portability?]
    [internal applications?]
    [etc.]

  Milestones (subject to agreement):
    - clarify goals and attributes consistent with SP strategy by
      Tucker's visit in June (with help from management)
    - first detailed design draft by end of June


2. REQUIREMENTS OF DYLAN

  Technical
    - efficient low-level MM under Windows
    - a variety of run-time GC algorithms for developers to choose
    - reliable incremental GC under Windows
    - real-time applications, multi-media

  Current provision
    - Dylan VM uses SmallTalk derived reference counter

  Planning
    - plan to adapt Boehm's conservative GC for Windows to supply
      requirement for GC within next two months
    - without MM Project support would adapt freely available
      solutions such as Amherst GC toolkit
    - replace VM reference counting GC with something


3. POSSIBLE STRATEGIES

  Nothing was decided -- these are just possible routes.

  1. Drop everything work on Dylan

  The MM Project can't hope to supply the short-term needs of Dylan
  for GC without dropping everything else.  Dylan should therefore go
  ahead with Boehm GC and other investigation unless the MM Project is
  redefined in terms of Dylan support.

  2. Work towards Dylan integration in 1995

  With Dylan release mid 1995 and large Dylan applications appearing
  late 1995, Dylan GC quality is not critical until mid 1995.  Dylan
  can continue with provisional GC (see above) and MM could produce GC
  product solution in 1995 for integration.  Requires careful design
  in both projects and ongoing (formal?) liaison.  This may leaves MM
  free to partially explore non-GC product markets before then.  This
  timescale may be too short, especially if non-GC MM products take
  off.

  3. Design for Dylan but don't constrain MM

  If we believe in MM products for direct sale or obtain OEM contracts
  for shipping with well known development environments our efforts
  may be best concentrated on satisfying that market.  We could
  include Dylan considerations on our design by basically treat the
  project as a customer.  This gives MM best flexibility but may
  lead to duplication of effort on Dylan GC.


4. ACTIONS

  1. Richard types up meeting notes for distribution.

  2. Neal and Jerri make ESSENTIAL feedback. (-8

  3. Mike and Tony look at current MM product ideas and other
     documents in ~mm/doc/home.html.

  4. Arrange further discussion and reporting between the two
     projects, maybe via a mailing list: mm-dylan.

  5. Neal and Jerri investigate important lead about Microsoft
     detailed below.



OUTSTANDING QUESTIONS

  How are Dylan's goals derived from company goals?  What are the
  other critical attributes of Dylan?

  Is it a goal for Memory Management to support Dylan or other
  internal development?  How do these goals balance?

  What are the critical attributes of the Memory Management project?



OTHER IMPORTANT INFO

  Mike can give contacts within the Microsoft compiler project.  He
  says they have *no* memory management expertise at Microsoft, either
  in compilation or OS.  I see an opportunity!

  Mike can arrange for contact between MM and Microsoft memory
  management people.

