                      L2: REQUIREMENTS MANAGEMENT
                                 kpa.rm
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-20

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Requirements 
Management, a key area of Level 2 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Requirements Management is to establish a common 
understanding between the cutomer and the software project of the customer's 
requirements that will be addressed by the software project.

Requirements Management involves establishing and maintaining an agreement with 
the customer on the requirements for the software project.  This agreement is 
referred to as the "system requirements allocated to the software." The 
"customer" may be interpreted as the system engineering group, the marketing 
group, another internal organization, or an external customer. The agreement 
covers both the technical and nontechnical (e.g., delivery dates) requirements. 
The agreement forms the basis for estimating, planning, performing, and 
tracking the software project's activities throughout the software life cycle.

The allocation of the system requirements to software, hardware, and other 
system components (e.g., humans) may be performed by a group external to the 
software engineering group (e.g., the system engineering group), and the 
software engineering group may have no direct control of this allocation. 
Within the constraints of the project, the software engineering group takes 
appropriate steps to ensure that the system requirements allocated to software, 
which they are responsible for addressing, are documented and controlled.

To achieve this control, the software engineering group reviews the initial and 
revised system requirements allocated to software to resolve issues before they 
are incorporated into the software project. Whenever the system requirements 
allocated to software are changed, the affected software plans, work products, 
and activities are adjusted to remain consistent with the updated requirements.


GOALS

.goal.controlled: System requirements allocated to software are controlled to 
establish a baseline for software engineering and management use.

.goal.consistent: Software plans, products, and activities are kept consistent 
with the system requirements allocated to software.

