          SUMMARY OF MM/DYLAN REQUIREMENTS MEETING, 1997-07-02
                        meeting.dylan.1997-07-02
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-07-02

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> and Nick Levine <nick> met Tony Mann <tony> 
to discuss requirements for the next two Dylan Memory Manager versions.


VERSIONS

.ver: The next two Dylan Memory Manager versions are intended to be 
version.dylan.honeybee, which will support the Dylan "full beta" release, and 
version.dylan.cottonwood, which will support the Dylan "ship" release.


.intent: That honeybee should in particular support interface changes. That 
cottonwood should address outstanding issues of performance & reliability.

NOTES

.notes: Nick and Richard ran through the requirements in req.dylan(5) and Tony 
categorized them with respect to each version.  This meeting resulted in the 
creation of version.dylan.honeybee, version.dylan.cottonwood, and the updating 
of req.dylan from revision 5 to 6.  See these documents in order to find the 
results of the meeting.  Tony expressed a preference for functional changes for 
honeybee, and attribute changes for cottonwood, so that changes to Dylan could 
be made as soon as possible.

ESTIMATES

.estimates.honeybee: Tasks agreed on for honeybee, and their estimated required 
effort (in person days) were as follows:

 .fun.final   5
 .fun.final.weak  1
 .prot.debug  3
 .prot.consult  5

plus the interfaces for:

 .attr.control  5
 .prot.stack-overflow 1
 .fun.weak.index  1

.estimates.cottonwood: Tasks agreed on for cottonwood, and their estimated 
required effort (in person days) were as follows:

 .attr.control  10
?? out of memory   2
 .prot.stack-overflow 6
 .dc.env.load  2
 .attr.time.boot  5
 .attr.time.pause.max 20
 .attr.space.boot (150k) 5
 .dc.link.no-crt  3

.estimates.neither: Even the above add up to more days than are available 
before cottonwood is released. The tasks below are candidates for postponing to 
beyond cottonwood. [I believe Richard and I came up with these after Tony had 
left the meeting. That being the case, they do not have any stamp of 
Dylan-group approval! - nick 1997-07-10]

?? out of memory   20
 .dc.env.self  10
 .fun.weak.index  10




