                          MM DOC PLAN MEETING
                         meeting.doc.1997-02-06
                             incomplete doc
                             lmb 1997-02-10

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby and Leah Bateman met by telephone to discuss 
outstanding issues regarding the MM Documentation Plan.


ONLINE HELP

.olh: Richard has asked Scott McKay to tell us how DUIM will support online 
help. (.act.olh)


DOC REQUIREMENTS

.req-def: Richard asked Leah to define the documentation requirements in more 
detail.  She can use his mail of today to mm-book as a model of how to proceed. 
(.act.req)


AUDIENCE/EXPERIENCE MATRIX

.a-e-matrix: Richard received the doc-specific audience/experience matrix that 
Leah faxed to him and will bring up the idea of a general a/e matrix at the 
Quartet Meeting. (.act.matrix)


PRODUCT PROFILE

.product-profile: Richard asked Leah if the Doc Group has done anything similar 
for other products.  Leah replied that she thinks Neal Dench might have done a 
product profile for HCIS; she will check with him and try to get a copy. 
(.act.product-profile.acquisition)  If Neal has a presentable one, she will 
pass it on to Richard. (.act.product-profile.distribution)

.design: Richard said that it might be most beneficial if Leah created the 
product profile in conjunction with the developers, so that it could also act 
as design documentation.  Leah said that she is hesitant to commit to this, 
since she hasn't actually done a product profile herself and so isn't sure how 
suitable it would be for design documentation.  This issue should be discussed 
further after  we find a product profile. (.act.product-profile.decision)


FORMAL REVIEWS

.review.doc: Richard would like to review the documentation at the same time as 
everything else: Ken has no objections and Leah is willing to try this approach.

.review.chunk-size: A major issue in reviews is making sure that the review 
material is presented in chunks of the appropriate size; Leah suggested that, 
for the reference manual, one review-sized chunk be equal to one entry.

.review.chunk-goal: Richard gave a brief explanation of how chunking works.  
Basically, if you have standard chunks of material, such as lines of code or 
words, you can more accurately predict how long it will take to produce part of 
a product, such as a chapter.  Leah has heard of metrics for documentation, 
based on both pages per day and days per pages, but isn't sure if any of these 
are supported by explicit research.  She will investigate these metrics 
further. (.act.metric)


GANTT CHART

.chart.worth: Richard is dubious about the Gantt chart attached to the 
documentation plan.  Leah said that she created the chart less as a true 
schedule and more as (1) an exercise in breaking things down into their 
component parts -- that is, getting a mid-level list of tasks and (2) a way to 
get a rough idea of how long the project is going to take.  <Note: Also as a 
way of creating rough milestones for herself, however worthless in the long 
run, and as an initial stab at task estimation that we can use to judge Leah's 
estimation skills in future.>  She has no illusions that the Gantt chart will 
prove even remotely accurate in the long run.


TRACKING TASKS

.tracking.evaluation: Leah asked if she should keep track of the time she 
spends on different tasks.  Richard replied that he wouldn't force her to, but 
that it would aid in predicting future tasks.  Leah will try it for a while and 
see how useful it is for documentation. (.act.tracking.evaluation)

.tracking.mechanism: Richard gave a brief explanation of how tracking works; 
the full explanation is set out in Humphrey's book.  Basically, the worker 
keeps a list of tasks.  Before starting a task, s/he estimates how long it will 
take him/her to perform the task.  S/he then performs the task and keeps track 
of how long it takes.  After completing a number of similar tasks, the records 
can be used to deermine an average working rate for that sort of task.  Leah 
will meet with Tucker early next week to have a look at the book, if Tucker has 
bought it. (.act.tracking.launch)


OTHER

Leah will put the MM Doc Plan into Spring before next Wednesday so that it can 
be part of next week's formal review. (.act.doc-plan.Spring, 
.act.doc-plan.review)

Leah will have outlines ready by next week.  <Note: For most of the week after, 
she will be visiting her family. She will add her parents' contact information 
to person.lmb.  (act.contact-info)>

Leah and Richard will meet by phone once a week.  The next meeting is scheduled 
for 1997-02-14 at 15:30 GMT.


ACTIONS

.act.olh: Hopefully, Scott will provide us with an explanation of how DUIM will 
support online help.

.act.req: Leah will refine the documentation goals and requirements before next 
Wednesday.

.act.matrix: Richard will approach the MM Quartet about the audience/experience 
matrix.

.act.product-profile.*: Leah will ask Neal about the HCIS product profile; if 
he wrote one, she will get a copy and pass it along to Richard.  We will then 
discuss whether such a document would be useful for documentation in general, 
and whether it could act as a type of design document.

.act.metric: Leah will research formal metrics for production of 
documentation.  She will not spend much time on this.

.act.tracking.*: Leah will read over the explanation of tracking task times in 
Humphrey, and will attempt to apply it to her own work.

.act.doc-plan.Spring: Leah will put the MM Doc Plan into Spring before next 
Wednesday.

.act.doc-plan.review: The MM Group will review the MM Doc Plan as part of their 
formal review next Wednesday.

.act.contact-info: Leah will add her contact information for the week of 
1997-02-19 to 1997-02-25 to person.lmb.

