       SUMMARY OF MEETING WITH THE UNIVERSITY OF KENT, 1997-03-21
                         meeting.ukc.1997-03-21
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-03-25

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> met Richard Jones <R.E.Jones@ukc.ac.uk> to 
discuss possible collaboration between the Memory Management Group (MM) and the 
Computing Laboratory at the University of Kent (UKC).  Simon Thompson 
<S.J.Thompson@ukc.ac.uk> was also present for some of the day.


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

.summary: Two main areas were discussed: Memory Management and Software 
Engineering.  The most significant opportunities in Memory Management are:

  measurement: measuring the memory attributes of real programs, using 
Harlequin's MM technology, to produce publishable results, and feed back to MM 
design and development.

  configuration: measuring the effects of various configurations of Harlequin's 
flexible Memory Pool System in order to provide experience for deployment of 
the system.

  data analysis and visualization: techniques for analyzing memory management 
data and providing useful analysis to the developer.

  modelling: developing an abstract model of the MM from which quantitative 
results about the real implementation can be obtained.

In the area of software engineering, the opportunities are:

  industrial panel: Harlequin could provide input to UKC's "industrial panel" 
which reviews courses and guides course development in order to ensure the 
relevance of teaching to industry.

  lectures: It was also suggested that Richard visit UKC to give talks and/or 
lectures on the subject of software engineering management.

The main benefit for the MM Group is quantitative feedback to the design of the 
MPS and products based on it.


LEVELS OF COLLABORATION

.levels: Richard Jones identified the following levels of collaboration:

  undergraduate: UKC undergraduates complete small projects [probably 
approximately 100 hours effort, as at Cambridge -- richard].  There might be 
opportunity for Harlequin to provide ideas for these projects which would 
increase their relevance to industry.

  sandwich: UKC runs sandwich courses which require industrial placements of 
one year.  These are seen as very valuable to the students, and might provide 
Harlequin with fresh blood, if you'll pardon the analogy.

  MEng and Distributed Systems MSc: these courses involve six-month projects.

  MSc: Projects at this level are one to two years.

  PhD: PhD-level projects would be three years.

  senior: collaboration with UKC Computing Laboratory staff, such as Richard 
Jones and Simon Thompson themselves.

.options: Other options include:

  - visiting UKC during milk-round recruitment tours

  - joint supervision of student projects

  - internships

  - CASE funding of postgraduate students.


MODELLING

.model: Richard Brooksby described his theories of using an abstract model of 
an implementation to gain confidence about the actual implementation.  The 
model is small enough to be verifiable, and the informal link between the model 
and the implementation is strong enough to add quality.  The link would be 
checked by formal technical review (inspection) or other methods.  (See also 
meeting.lfcs.1996-10-08 at which Richard Brooksby first proposed this idea.)

.fig.ver.upward: How verification from the bottom up fails to add quality to a 
whole implementation.


 .fig.ver.downward: How verification from the top down might add quality to a 
whole implementation.


.model.attr: Richard Brooksby described how the collaboration with the 
Edinburgh LFCS had produced some parts of an ML model, but slanted toward 
formal correctness rather than qualitative analysis of the implementation.  He 
described how one might instrument the model to gain an understanding of the 
attributes of the implementation through execution of the model.  This 
interested Simon Thompson greatly, and is a possible area for collaboration 
with him.


THE HARLEQUIN MPS

.mps: Richard Brooksby described the key features, architecture, and model of 
use of the Harlequin Memory Pool System to Richard Jones, under the terms of 
the non-disclosure agreement.  No technical details of implementation 
techniques were disclosed at this stage.
 
.mps.dist: The possibility of applying the MPS architecture to distributed 
systems was discussed.  Richard Jones described the specific problems of 
distributed GC.  In the light of these, Richard Brooksby stated that he believe 
the architecture of the MPS (though not the implementation) was amenable to 
solving these problems.

.mps.smp: The possibility of applying the MPS architecture to symmetric 
shared-memory multiprocessor systems was discussed.  Richard Brooksby stated 
that he believed both the architecture of the MPS and the implementation were 
amenable to working well in this context.


GOALS

.goals: The goals of UKC for a collaboration were discussed.  Richard Jones 
brainstormed the following set of goals (paraphrased by Richard Brooksby) as a 
basis for discussion.

.goal.improve: Improve the standing of the Computing Laboratory at UKC with 
those who judge it.  Do this by supporting the strengths of the Lab, and 
improving links with industry leaders, such as Harlequin.

.goal.curious: Satisfy the intellectual curiosity of the collaborators.

.goal.real: Broaden knowledge and understanding of the "real" world.

.goal.benefit: Work to the benefit of developers and end-users of software.  
Don't do development for its own sake.

.goal.ground: Support open-ended research, but grounded in reality.

.goal.relevance: Improve the relevance of teaching at UKC to the real world and 
the needs of industry.

.goal.inform: Inform industry of University work.

.goal.world-needs: Understand what the world needs (reserving the right to 
decide that isn't always what it wants).  Do this by seminars, and feedback to 
the industrial panel.

.goal.uk: Help the country make progress and prosper.  Do this by advancing our 
"intellectual" industry.

.goal.promote: Promote the field of GC in the world at large.

.goal.quality: Advance the quality of software in general.

.goal.build: Build up (expand) the Computing Laboratory by adding postgraduates 
and RAs by obtaining funding.

.goal.attract: Attract quality people to the Computing Laboratory.


OTHER NOTES

.nice: Richard Jones stated that he believed that both the modelling idea and 
the MPS appeared to be "significant advances" and as such, he was very 
interested in working with us.

.c-gc: Richard Jones will be addressing the Association of C and C++ 
Programmers this summer in Oxford on the subject of GC.  Stroustrup will also 
be speaking.  We should consider attending and possibly presenting.

.workshop: No progress has been made on organizing a memory management workshop 
this summer (see meeting.ukc.1997-02-12.summary).

.fig.link: How academic collaboration fits into the development process.

 - Process and Acacdemia Diagram 


ACTIONS

.act.goals: Richard Brooksby will produce a tightened draft goal statement 
(i.e. not the brainstorm above) and discuss it with Richard Jones.

.act.report: Richard Brooksby will report back to George Cleland and obtain a 
decision as to whether to proceed with the collaboration.

ATTACHMENT
   "Process and Acacdemia Diagram"

